Knopp

Once a week Karl Knopp's father would take a route to Cleveland to sell through out German neighbors during World War II, since they sold potatoes among other products, they were able to make pretty good money since they were able to sell them at a good price. Also selling butter amd oats around North royalton. Took all day with a team of men on horses to escort the wagons to Cleveland. Incase they got stuck and also to keep them safe until they reached the main paved road. They grew Sweet corn, a lot of catan and also potatoes and store in the cellar.Price of potatoes went sky high to pay off the farm in WWII

DSD CEALED PRODUCTS and snacks, a lot of shippmnents like these products have their own drivers and so the drivers stalk their shelves. This is because the grocery store often uses operates with those products as consignment partnership.
Main office to store
Driver stocks the shelves
Slotting fees
Sorta like a fee market 

In about 45 min we made it from my house where Karl Knopp picked me up in Hudson and we made our way to the Hienens distributions center that all the stores in the area have trucks shipping out from. Produce is all in this warehouse. Hienens also has its Frozen meet and stuff is in Warrenville, but there old distribution center and headquarter also reside there in the same general area.

This contrast a national brand like Giant eagle that maybe has 50'in Ohio or 50 alone in Pittsburgh

Term cost is from the cost of storing
Standard is 30 days net
12% couldn't give 2%
It's not COD

Think about interest of millions of dollars of produce
These are the constraints and setting that indicate 

Devoted trucks by store for hornets
Pero family farms
Kendal shipping as a contractor

Shrink: happens on truck; trucking eats it
Happens at Hienens, they eat it
Produce shelf life it eat an by who ships it

Pay by scan, like perennials 
Trubbermade money magazine
Wooster
To obsorb their volume they had to sell to Walmart only because they were the only buyers at the level

Worked as a plant cellar
Here in Ohio were 50 of the largest green house
Green circle - 100 acres of greeen house
100 acres is like a 20 acre farm
Enough box stores that they can bid green houses against each other. Get to large get caught in this treadmill

53 are difficult to use, Jorden's are 45
Without a sleeper cabin you get about 5
Feet less
 
Profit is 2-5% in the grocery Buissness
Pretty good, but Not good when things are bad
Trucks need to do what you need them to do. Period.
All about customer XP

WWII
Move by rail and grapes from here to buffalo
Welches is a co-op
Grapes have been moved west

West Ohio had a big tomato industry
Freemont had a Hiens ketchup plant

Sentera farm co op

Repositrack

All data
Stock and central

Mobility

Ben B is like Sanson for Detroit

This concludes what me and Karl discussed as we got his truck docked at the distribution center and we made are way in.
In the office I got to  meet HERE, the head of distribution management.
DISCUSSION L

Following our chat, I was able to numb into HERE.
We got to talking and he offered to show me around the ware refrigerated were house.
We discussed the realities of being able to track shipment. He told me about how some local supplyer can be better at tracking down the problem packages if they have one that they need to send back or that is below the desired quality.
In fact sometimes it works out since they have such high standards, they are often able to easily forward that produce to another buyer that is more standard in their expectations.

However many of the shipments that they might reserve from large distributors are coordinated from consolidated bokeragea like SAMSON, but even then they might be buying from food terminal auctions that colimnate produce from really anywhere you could image, this often means that they are unable to recoup cost my narrowing their problem product to go on waste, as unlike producer to hub, they can't operate by packaging boxes in order like the row or field they are gotten form.

The single largest issue I observed is the ability for a company even like Hienens to manage their inventory. There ability to order produce and manage its arrival is completely separate from the inventory.
And funny enough, they use the same company for both.
Even more over, they are not able to itemize shipments they send to their store centers, so their only ability to track down bad product sources or how much waste is being reported is to manually check what might have been the sourced supply and if the warehouse still has product in that suppliers shelf area.
So they might be sending out Granny Smith apples from all different suppliers but if they can itemize instances and only measured amounts, they stay locked.
Also the reporting and inventory system that the local stores use also does not communicate with the main warehouse in any itemized capacity.
All three use the same company and each developed tool offered ever growing costs that questions any ROI for improvement if they are managing now.

He also showed me the room where they control the hormone gas that causes produce to ripen, by filtering it out of the air they are able to prevent the compound effect to slow down. He also told me about how the some facilities have rooms were they actually pump the gas back in.
This is how we are able to get bananas. They come shipped hard as rock. Pineapples too.
I didn't relive this but he made me aware that I probably never even had a true taste of the fruits I think iv had.
This came about because as he told me, a fruit might become sweeter as it ripens, but there is not actually any more surfer in the fruit than the moment it was picked. It's just a chemical change that changes the taste.
On that same note, much of the produce that we eat is picked so early in all regards, (not to mention artificially grown with nitrogen fertilizer, taking away from the nutrition the soil is meant to provide the crops), this results in a lack of true taste and a caloric intake that always keeps our bodies still Hungary, but insatiated due to a starvation of nutrition.

We also spoke about the devices used for tracking shipments that are slipped in with shipments in different areas to track temptures through out the refrigerated truck, not just a general temperate.
 