 Chapter 1 Technical Communication: Global, Collaborative, and Digital
A digitally created figure shows images of a globe, a network, a laptop, and a few books all superimposed on each other.
Learning Objectives

    1.1 Define technical communication.

    1.2 Describe the key characteristics of effective technical communication.

    1.3 List the three main purposes of technical documents.

    1.4 Recognize typical technical documents.

    1.5 Understand the global, collaborative, and digital nature of technical communication.

Chapter Outline

    What is Technical Communication? 3

    Main Features of Technical Communication 4

    Three Primary Purposes of Technical Communication 7

    Common Types of Technical Documents 12

    Technical Communication is Global, Collaborative, and Digital 13

        Strategies for Global Technical Communication

        Strategies for Organizing a Team Project

        Strategies for Running a Meeting

        Strategies for Managing Team Conflicts

        Strategies for Peer Review and Editing

        Checklist for Effective Technical Communication

What is Technical Communication?

    1.1Define technical communication.

Technical communication is the exchange of information that helps people interact with technology, advance workplace goals, and solve complex problems.

We live in a world where many of our everyday actions depend on complex but usable information. For example, when you purchase or install a new device, such as a DVD player or wireless speakers, you need clear, easy-to-use instructions. From banking systems to online courses to business negotiations, countless aspects of daily life are affected by technology, and we rely on usable technical information to answer questions such as these:

        How do I access my online bank statement?

        How do I connect my tablet with a conference room’s projection system?

        How do I paste a digital photo into a document and resize the image?

Technical information is also used in more specialized settings. For example, a physician performing heart surgery must have clear information about how to install a pacemaker. A government research scientist must have accurate instructions about how to write a grant or how to perform a particular experiment. An engineer must have access to the correct specifications for designing a bridge or configuring a new app. In specialized settings, technical communication answers questions such as these:

        Do the benefits of the Lyme disease vaccine outweigh its risks?

        What are the technical limits to wind energy?

        How effectively will the new heating system circulate in the top floors of the new office complex?

In the workplace, we are not only consumers of technical communication but also producers. Virtually all professionals, at some point, function as technical communicators. Experts are often required to present their knowledge to nonexpert audiences. For instance, a nuclear engineer testifying before Congress would need to write a report explaining climate change data in nonscientific language to policy makers and the general public. Nurses and other medical professionals are often required to explain complex medical concepts to patients and families. Writers of instructions for uploading new software need to be sure that a wide range of readers can perform the task without having to call customer service.

Technical communication is global, collaborative, and digital. Technical documents, including user manuals, instructions and procedures, online help, and other such materials, are accessible by people around the globe, created by teams from different countries and time zones, and available online in formats suitable for reading on a variety of devices from laptops to tablets to smartphones to print.

Main Features of Technical Communication

    1.2 Describe the key characteristics of effective technical ­communication.

Technical communication differs from other communication and writing courses you take in college. In first-year writing (freshman composition) or expository writing, the emphasis typically is on one type of document: the traditional college essay. As you work on the assignments for this course, the skills you learned in previous writing classes will remain important, but the writing will often be different. Technical documents typically exhibit the following characteristics.
Focus is on the Reader, Not the Writer

Unlike poetry, fiction, or essays, technical documents rarely focus on the author’s personal thoughts and feelings. This doesn’t mean that technical documents should have no personality (or voice), but it does mean that the needs of your readers must come first. Users of technical communication are only interested in you, the communicator, to the extent that they want to know what you have done, what you recommend, or how you speak for your company or organization. This type of communication is called “user-centered communication” (see Figure 1.1). User-centered communication requires a focus on the people who will be reading and using the document. What do your readers need to know? What tasks are they trying to perform?
Figure 1.1

User-centered communication
A figure shows a flowchart illustrating user-centered communication.
Figure 1.1 Full Alternative Text

Placing the reader’s needs and interests first takes practice because many of us are taught to write from our own perspectives. For instance, assume you’ve been asked to create a set of instructions that explain how people in the community can bring household hazardous waste (gasoline, paint) for recycling. Assume also that you live in the neighborhood near the recycling center and often visit that location. In this instance, you could easily forget to include a map and directions to the center, unless you focus consistently on your actual readers—people who are new in town, people who don’t live close to the facility, and so on.
Document Design is Efficient and Accessible

Unlike college essays, which take essentially one shape (paragraphs of text), technical documents may take the form of a brochure, a memo, a report with different sections, a numbered set of instructions, a Web site, online help, a blog, a wiki, or an email with a PDF attachment. Regardless of format and media, the design must be efficient and accessible, making it easy for readers to find what they are looking for and use the content to perform a task or answer a question.
Writing Style is Clear and Relevant

Technical communication uses clear language. For example, the instructions for using a fire extinguisher (Figure 1.4, page 9) are written for a wide range of readers. Likewise, the letter from the company’s general manager to a potential client (Figure 1.5, pages 10–11) is another example of clear communication.

Information is relevant if the audience can apply it to the task at hand. For instance, if someone needs to operate a fire extinguisher, that person needs clear, brief sentences listed numerically without a lot of unnecessary explanation. As shown in Figure 1.4, some limited background information may be required (by law or by code), but even that information must be clear, relevant, and to the point.
Information is Persuasive, Truthful, and Based on Research

Persuasion means trying to influence someone’s actions, opinions, or decisions. In the workplace, we rely on persuasion daily: to win coworker support, to attract clients and customers, or to request funding. But changing someone’s mind is never easy, and sometimes it is impossible. Your success will depend on who you are trying to persuade, what you are requesting, and how entrenched they are in their own views.

All technical documents are persuasive, in some sense. Some documents, such as the letter in Figure 1.5, are explicitly persuasive, in that the writer is trying to convince the reader that the proposed project is the right choice. Other documents, such as the instructions in Figure 1.4, are mainly informative, but they are also implicitly persuasive: The writer is also trying to show readers that the fire extinguisher is easy to use and safe.

In short, a technical communicator is a problem solver and, as such, must be aware of the best balance between providing readers with the information they need and persuading them to respond as desired, as illustrated in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2

Balancing information and persuasion
A figure shows a flowchart illustrating balancing information and persuasion.
Figure 1.2 Full Alternative Text

Even when you need to be overtly persuasive, as in a sales proposal, honesty is essential. A document that is highly persuasive but in some way dishonest may influence readers in the short term but will lead to long-term problems. You will lose credibility with the client or your boss and could potentially damage a working relationship for life.

Even routine technical documents produced on the job are based to some extent on research. For example, a routine email to employees about a new performance review system may not require extensive research, but the information must be accurate. Accuracy in this case may only involve double-checking meeting notes or asking a colleague in the human resources department for clarification on some point, but double-checking your facts is still research. With more complex documents, the research component of technical communication becomes more obvious. For more on research, see Chapter 2.

Three Primary Purposes of Technical Communication

    1.3 List the three main purposes of technical documents.

Most technical communication seeks to address one of three primary purposes: to anticipate and answer questions (inform), to enable people to perform a task (instruct), or to influence people’s thinking (persuade). Keep in mind that these purposes often overlap (as in the following sample documents). However, most documents have one primary purpose: to inform, to instruct, or to persuade.
Informational Purpose

Figure 1.3 displays an informational document created by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. It is designed for a wide audience of readers who may know little about the topic (bioremediation), but the writer has kept audience diversity in mind by anticipating and answering likely questions.
Figure 1.3

An informational document
A figure shows an informational document.

Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Web site <www.epa.gov>.
Figure 1.3 Full Alternative Text
Instructional Purpose

Figure 1.4 is an instructional document. As we have all experienced, effective instructions can be a pleasure to work with because they help people do what they want to do. But poor instructions can create frustration, often causing people to return the product and to have second thoughts about purchasing that brand in the future.
Figure 1.4

An Instructional Document

Figure 1.4 Full Alternative Text
Persuasive Purpose

Figure 1.5 shows a persuasive document in the form of a letter from a company that distributes systems for generating electrical power from recycled steam. General Manager William Bullock writes a persuasive answer to a customer’s question: “Why should I invest in the system you are proposing for my plant?” As you read the letter, note how the writer focuses on reasons that are important to the reader.
Figure 1.5

A persuasive document
Common Types of Technical Documents

    1.4 Recognize typical technical documents.

Many of you probably encounter the following types of documents routinely, either through work or school. You may also be asked to produce such documents for a class, an internship, or your job.

    Memos. Organizations use memos as the primary means of internal written communication. Unlike a conversation, a memo leaves a record for future reference. An employee might write a memo to a manager requesting a pay raise; a team of students might write a memo to an instructor explaining their progress on a term project; or an office manager might write a memo to company employees to outline the new vacation policy. Most memos are sent out via email (either as an attachment or as a stand-alone email message).

    Email. Email is the main way people communicate in today’s workplace. Email is used widely to communicate with clients, customers, suppliers, and associates worldwide. Email messages are sometimes written more informally than paper memos or letters, but in the workplace, most writers recognize that email must maintain a similar level of professionalism to other formats.

    Letters. Letters, especially on company letterhead, offer a more formal way to communicate than email or memos. As a student, you might write a letter to request research data or to apply for a summer internship. At work, you might use a letter format to persuade a client to invest in a new technology or to explain the delay in a construction project.

    Instructions. Instructions explain the steps or course of action for completing a specific task such as how to use a fire extinguisher. Instructions come in various formats: online instructions may be accessible from the help menu of an app; brief instructions may be written on single-page reference cards; longer instructions may be part of a more comprehensive user manual.

    Procedures. Procedures are similar to instructions in that they explain how to perform a task step by step; however, procedures are different in that they usually deal with matters of company or organizational policy. Many companies maintain standard operating procedures (SOPs) for tasks such as how to test soil samples or how to access corporate databases.

    Manuals. Almost every technology product or service comes with a manual. Manuals may include instructions on how to assemble, set up, and use a product, but they also include background information, such as technical specifications or lists of materials. Most people have used manuals to perform tasks such as connecting the components of your sound system or setting up the voice mail on your office phone system. Most manuals are available in hard copy and for digital download.

    Brochures. To market goods or services, companies produce brochures. Brochures from professional organizations such as the American Medical Association may define various medical conditions, explain the causes, and describe available treatments. Many government agencies create brochures to help with issues such as how to obtain student loans or how to start a small business.

    Proposals. Proposals offer solutions to problems and make specific recommendations for how to implement those solutions. A proposal’s purpose is usually to persuade readers to improve conditions, accept a service or product, or otherwise support a plan of action. Proposals are often written in response to calls for proposals (CFPs) or requests for proposals (RFPs). For example, a nonprofit child-care facility may seek safer playground equipment, or a pharmaceutical company may wish to develop a new online education program for its employees. These organizations would issue RFPs, and each interested vendor would prepare a proposal that examines the problem, presents a solution, and defines the process and associated fees.

    Reports. Reports, both short and long, are generally based on the study of a specific problem or issue. Some reports are strictly informative (“Why Smartphone Batteries Can Explode”); other reports recommend solutions to urgent problems (“Recommended Security Measures for Airline Safety”); and still others have an overtly persuasive goal, advocating a particular course of action (“Why Voters Should Reject the Nuclear Waste Storage Facility Proposed for Our County”).
    
    
Technical Communication is Global, Collaborative, and Digital

    1.5 Understand the global, collaborative, and digital nature of technical communication.

In the workplace, the documents we create have global implications, are typically written not by one individual but in teams, and are created using digital technologies and distributed electronically. These concepts are described here and apply across all chapters and assignments in this book.
Technical Communication is Global

Employees who work across different continents, countries, and cultures must pay special attention to various customs and values. Key to this practice is the idea of “face saving.” No one wants to be embarrassed in public, have his or her traditions or values criticized, or be treated with disrespect. (All these situations represent what is sometimes called a loss of “face.”) But people in different cultures have different views about what is embarrassing or insulting. For example, in some cultures a “tell it like it is” approach is considered rude, while in others body language such as leaning back in your chair and crossing your arms signals disrespect.

If you are working on a team project and the team spans different countries and cultures, do some research to learn about your team members, to appreciate their frame of reference, and to establish common ground. You may find, for example, that your team members in another country value a slower, more patient approach or put a value on oral communication (by phone or video conference) rather than written communication at certain stages of the project.

Any document can reach across the globe. For example, the instructions you write for a new cell phone may well end up on a Web site, where they will be used by customers worldwide. Some international readers of your instructions may be offended by commands in strongly worded imperative forms, such as “STOP: Do not insert the storage card until you reach Step 3.” Or they may be baffled by icons and other visuals that have no meaning in their culture.

Documents may originate in English but then be translated into many other languages. In these cases, writers must be careful to use English that is easy to translate. Idioms, humor, and analogies are often difficult for automated as well as human translators, and so these items should as a rule be avoided when writing technical documents

For more advice on global communication, see the following Strategies.
Strategies
for Global Technical Communication

    Learn as much as possible about the culture and background of your team members or ­customers. Search online for information from credible sources that can help you understand the communication norms for the countries or cultures with which you will be working.

    Be respectful and considerate. Do nothing that will cause anyone to feel embarrassed in front of the group.

    Avoid the use of humor, slang, and idioms. These items are culturally specific, do not translate well, and could be misunderstood by nonnative audiences.

    Avoid stereotyping. Violating a person’s cultural frame of reference is offensive, but so is reducing individual complexity to a laundry list of cultural stereotypes. Any generalization about a culture is just that—a generalization. People are still individuals and should be respected as such.

Technical Communication is Collaborative

Complex technical documents (especially long reports, proposals, and manuals) are rarely created by one person working alone. In the workplace, such documents are typically produced by teams of writers, engineers, scientists, graphic artists, editors, reviewers, marketing personnel, lawyers, and other professionals.

Teams can work in person or virtually. Usually, though, teamwork involves a combination of face-to-face meetings and technology-facilitated exchanges, such as those via the phone, email, or the Web. Whether the team shares information in person or virtually, members have to find ways of openly sharing their ideas, expressing their views persuasively, giving and accepting constructive criticism, and reaching agreement with others who hold different views. Teamwork is successful only when there is strong cooperation, a recognized team structure, and clear communication. The following Strategies explain how to work on a team project systematically.
Strategies
for Organizing a Team Project

    Appoint a group manager. The manager assigns tasks, enforces deadlines, conducts meetings, consults with supervisors, and “runs the show.”

    Define a clear and definite goal. Compose a purpose statement that spells out the project’s goal and the plan for achieving the goal. Be sure each team member understands the goal.

    Identify the type of document required. Is this a report, a proposal, a manual, or a brochure? Are visuals and supplements (abstract, appendices, and so on) needed? Will the document be made available online, in print, or both?

    Divide the tasks. Who will be responsible for which parts of the document or which phases of the project? Who is best at doing what (writing, editing, layout and graphics, oral presentation)? Which tasks will be done individually and which collectively? Spell out—in writing—clear expectations for each team member. Also keep in mind that the final version should display a consistent style throughout, as if written by one person only.

    Establish a timetable. A timetable will help the team visualize the whole project, each part of the project, and completion dates for each phase.

    Decide on a meeting schedule. How often, where, and for how long will the group meet?

    Establish a procedure for responding to each other’s work. Will reviewing and editing be done in writing, face to face, as a group, one on one, or online?

    Develop a file-naming system for various drafts. Be careful about saving documents. It’s too easy to save over a previous version and lose something important. Consider using a document sharing system such as Google drive or Dropbox.

    Establish procedures for dealing with interpersonal problems. How will disputes be discussed and resolved (by vote, by the manager, or by other means)? How will irrelevant discussion be curtailed?

    Select a group decision-making style. Will decisions be made by the group manager alone, by group input, or by majority vote?

    Decide how to evaluate each member’s contribution. Will the manager assess each member’s performance and in turn be evaluated by each member? Will members evaluate each other? What are the criteria?

    Prepare a project planning form. Figure 1.6 shows a sample form you can adapt for your team.
    Figure 1.6

    Project planning form
    A figure shows a project planning form.
    Figure 1.6 Full Alternative Text

    Submit regular progress reports. These reports track activities, problems, and rate of progress.

Running Successful Meetings

Despite the many digital tools available for collaboration (see pages 20–21), if possible you should start your project with an in-person meeting for the entire team. Meetings are usually scheduled for one of two purposes: (1) to convey or exchange information or (2) to make decisions. Informational meetings tend to run smoothly because there is less cause for disagreement. But decision-based meetings often fail to reach clear resolution because the meeting leader fails to take charge. Running a meeting doesn’t mean imposing one’s views or stifling opposing views, but it does mean keeping the discussion moving and centered on the issue, as explained in the following Strategies.
Strategies
for Running a Meeting

    Set an agenda. Distribute copies of the agenda to participants beforehand: “Our 10 a.m. Monday meeting will cover the following items: . . . ” Spell out each item, set a strict time limit for discussion of each item, and stick to this plan. Use Google drive or a similar document sharing app so everyone has access to the latest version of the agenda.

    Ask each person to prepare as needed. A meeting works best when each participant makes a specific contribution. Appoint someone to take notes or minutes, and appoint others to other roles, such as doing background research on a particular topic that will be discussed.

    Appoint a different “observer” for each meeting. This person’s job is to take notes on what aspects of the meeting did or did not work well.

    Begin by summarizing the minutes of the last meeting. This process will ensure that the conversation in this meeting moves beyond what was concluded previously. (For preparing meeting minutes, see pages 272–273.)

    Give all members a chance to speak. Don’t allow anyone to monopolize. At the same time, encourage quiet members to contribute. If someone is connecting via video or phone, reach out to that person to be sure they are still connected to the meeting.

    Stick to the issue. When the conversation strays, politely nudge members back on track.

    Keep things moving. Don’t get hung up on a single issue. Work toward a consensus by highlighting points of agreement and pushing for a resolution.

    Observe, guide, and listen. As the meeting leader, don’t lecture or dictate. Instead, take charge by steering the group discussion.

    Summarize major points before calling for a vote. Paraphrase what has been discussed to be sure everyone understands the major points and so that clarifications or corrections can be made before the vote.

    End the meeting on schedule. This is not a hard-and-fast rule. If you feel the issue is about to be resolved at the meeting’s end time, continue. Understand, however, that some participants may need to leave for other appointments.

Identifying and Managing Group Conflicts

Even when all team members have good working relationships and positive attitudes, conflicts still can arise, usually because of the following factors:

    Interpersonal styles. People who work on teams often clash because of differences in a range of areas, including personality, working style, cultural norms (see page 18), or ability to take criticism. Some might disagree about exactly what or how much the group should accomplish, who should do what, or who should have the final say. Some might feel intimidated or hesitant to speak out. Certain people may be comfortable with a “just the facts” approach, while others on the team may interpret this style for rudeness.

    Digital communication. When we communicate via text or email, ideas can be easily misunderstood. The lack of vocal inflection and facial features (such as a smile or frown) can turn what you thought was a humorous comment into a serious insult. Also, because we write more quickly in digital settings, we may not proofread carefully and thus might leave out important information, causing the team to become confused and concerned.

    Cultural differences. According to one expert, some cultures value intuition and ambiguity more than hard evidence or data, or they prioritize politeness and personal relationships more than business relationships. Cultures also differ in their perceptions of time. Some are “all business” and like to get directly to the point; others take as long as they feel is needed to weigh the issues and come to carefully considered conclusions (Victor, 233). Finally, cultures differ in their accepted methods of communication, varying in their willingness to express disagreement, question or be questioned, leave things unstated, or use nonverbal language (Victor, 206).

    When group conflicts do arise, deal with them directly and openly by using the following Strategies.

Strategies
for Managing Team Conflicts

    Listen actively. Perhaps the most constructive way to manage team conflict is to avoid it by really listening to others. Listening actively means focusing your attention when people speak, keeping your mind open to what they say, letting them finish before you interject, using direct eye contact and body language that communicates interest, and asking for clarification when genuinely needed. In short, observe the 90/10 rule: listen 90 percent of the time, and speak only 10 percent of the time. As President Calvin Coolidge once said, “Nobody ever listened himself out of a job.”

    Avoid gender and cultural bias. Respect the fact that men and women must be treated equally as team members, and understand that assertiveness and reserve are qualities of both genders. Also, do not assume that one culture’s approach to business, time, or communication is better than that of another.

    Use technology wisely. Email is the worst way to resolve a conflict. Find a time for the team to meet in person, or use a video chat or a group phone call.

    Give everyone a chance to be heard. Encourage quieter members to speak up, and curtail dominating members from speaking excessively.

    Take everyone’s feelings and opinions seriously. Don’t play favorites. Every team member has something valid to contribute.

    Don’t be afraid to disagree. Politely let other team members know if you don’t agree with their ideas or opinions. Your point of view is as important as anyone else’s.

    Offer and accept constructive criticism. Criticism focused on helping reach the team’s goal, as opposed to seeming like a personal attack, creates an atmosphere of open communication.

    Find points of agreement with others who hold different views. Although you might not agree with everyone in the group, find those points on which you do agree.

    When the group makes a decision, support it fully. At some point, decisions must be made. If you are outvoted, accept the fact that a vote is binding and that you represent the group as a whole, even if you disagree with the final decision.

Reviewing and Editing the Work of Others

Documents produced in teams must be reviewed and edited extensively. Reviewing means evaluating how well a document connects with its audience and meets its purpose. When reviewing, you explain to the writer how you respond as a reader; you point out what works or doesn’t work. This commentary helps the writer think about ways of revising. Reviewers typically examine a document to make sure it includes these features:

    accurate, appropriate, useful, and legal content

    material organized for the reader’s understanding

    clear, easy-to-read, and engaging style

    effective visuals and page design

Editing means polishing a document by making it more precise and readable at the sentence and word level. Editing may happen simultaneously with reviewing, but usually it comes after a document has been reviewed and revised—when the more global considerations of content, organization, style, and design have already been resolved and the editor can focus on more particular details. Editors typically suggest improvements such as these:

    rephrasing or reorganizing sentences

    clarifying a topic sentence

    choosing a better word or phrase

    correcting spelling, usage, punctuation, and so on

For a team project, at work or at school, you can each take turns reviewing and editing drafts of the document by using the following Strategies.
Strategies
for Peer Review and Editing

    Read the entire piece at least twice before you comment. Develop a clear sense of the document’s purpose and audience. Try to visualize the document as a whole before you evaluate specific parts.

    Focus first on the big picture. Begin with the document’s content and organization. Is the document appropriate for its audience and purpose? Is the supporting material relevant and convincing? Is the discussion easy to follow? Does each paragraph do its job? Do all the visuals serve a distinct and appropriate purpose? Is the design appropriate for this document?

    Be honest but diplomatic. Say what you think, but don’t merely offer negative comments. Begin with something positive before moving to suggested improvements. Maintain a supportive tone.

    Explain why something doesn’t work. Instead of “this paragraph is confusing,” say “because this paragraph lacks a clear topic sentence, I had trouble discovering the main idea.” Instead of “I don’t like this visual,” say “this visual doesn’t work, not only because it is a little blurry, but also because it doesn’t add to the ­discussion.”

    Make specific recommendations for improvements. Write out suggestions in enough detail for the writer to know what to do. Don’t just say “I think you should add a chart here.” Instead offer “I think you should add a new chart here to show all the numerical information you’ve provided in an easy-to-understand visual way.”

    Don’t expect everyone to agree with your suggestions. Even professional editors can disagree. Offer your best advice but don’t dictate—others may have better suggestions. If different readers offer conflicting opinions of what needs to be revised, seek your team leader’s opinion or take it to a vote.

    Understand the acceptable limits of editing. Don’t simply rewrite an entire document in your own words. Although changes can range from making a few suggestions and additions to closely editing every paragraph, always preserve the author’s original vision and style.

    Focus next on the particulars. Once the document has been reviewed and revised for content, organization, style, and design, refine the sentences and word choice—and proofread several times.

Technical Communication is Digital

In today’s workplace, teams are distributed across different locations, working hours, time zones, and countries. Even within the same local team, some people may work from home while others work mainly from the office. For a school project, you and other team members will probably have very different schedules. For these reasons, technical communication is heavily dependent on digital collaboration. For instance, a draft document might be created in Word and circulated via email. Or, team members may collaborate using a shared drive, such as Google Drive or Microsoft OneDrive. Some organizations use email to send attachments, but others prefer to make the document available on the company’s internal server (intranet).

Along with the use of digital technologies for collaboration, technical communication also involves the use of digital apps that combine words, images, and sounds effectively. Some documents, such as formal letters, rely heavily or solely on words; other documents, such as instructions, blend words with pictures or diagrams. Technical training documents, such as certain types of procedures, may contain embedded video links.

The following technologies are used regularly in technical communication:

    Teleconferencing. The oldest form of virtual collaboration—still very much in use—occurs when multiple callers hold a conference via the telephone.

    Email. The most popular app for workplace communication, email is used for sending attachments and keeping track of ideas and discussions among team members and individuals.

    Instant messaging (IM). IM is a fast and easy way to hold a real-time conversation among multiple people, as long as they are all logged in.

    Project management software. Most large organizations use dedicated software, such as Microsoft Project, to manage complex team projects.

    Editing software. Editing tools allow multiple users to see each other’s edits (which are tagged by the user’s initials) and to accept or reject those changes. An example is Microsoft Word’s “track changes” feature.

    Digital whiteboards. These tools provide a large screen that allows participants to write, sketch, and erase from their own computers in real time.

    Web conferencing. A password-protected Web site provides the medium for this more contemporary version of teleconferencing.

    Blogs. Blogs allow people to create postings or add comments to previous postings as a way for teams to share and refine ideas.

    Intranets. Intranets are sites set up for internal company use only. Readers can access files, documents, and other content.

    Wikis. Wikis can be set up to allow access only to those directly involved in the project. When a team member edits a document, a new version is created and old versions saved.

For more on digital communication, see Chapters 18–21.
Checklist
for Effective Technical Communication

    Does my document focus on the reader, not the writer?

    Is the document efficient and accessible?

    Is the document clear and easy to understand?

    Does the document give readers what they need?

    Have I used the appropriate media to convey my message?

    Have I created the document to address a global audience as needed?

    Am I able to work as part of a team?

    Is the document sufficiently persuasive to get the response I want?

    Is the document based on careful research?

    Does the document achieve its primary purpose (i.e., inform, instruct, persuade)—or a combination of purposes?

Global Considerations

    Do I understand the communication customs of the international audience for my document?

    Is my writing clear and direct so that it is easy to translate?

    Have I avoided idioms, humor, and slang?

    Have I avoided stereotyping different cultures and groups of people?

    Is the communication about this project respectful to everyone?

Collaborative Considerations

    Has our team appointed a team manager?

    Does the team agree on the type of document required?

    Do we have a plan for how to divide the tasks?

    Have we established a timetable and decided on a meeting schedule?

    Do we have an agenda for our first meeting?

    Are we using the project planning form to help us get organized?

Digital Considerations

    Have we decided which apps we will use for our collaboration (Google Drive; Microsoft OneDrive; other)?

    Do we know which digital features our document requires (text only; text plus images; video) and how it will be distributed (online as a downloadable PDF; as a Word file stored on the company Intranet)?

Applications
General Applications

    Write an email to your boss, requesting that the company pay your tuition for this class. Explain how the class will help you be more effective on the job. Proofread your email: Is it too long or too short? Is the tone professional or demanding? Did you write from your perspective or the reader’s (your boss)?

    Find an example of an informational document or a set of instructions or a persuasive letter. Identify in your document the features of effective technical writing discussed in this chapter. Discuss your findings in class.

Team Applications

    Class members will work together often this semester. So that everyone becomes acquainted, your task is to introduce to the class the person seated next to you. (That person, in turn, will introduce you.) Follow this procedure:

        Exchange with your neighbor whatever personal information you think the class needs: background, major, career plans, communication needs of your intended profession, and so on. Each person gets five minutes to tell her or his story.

        Take careful notes; ask questions if you need to.

        Take your notes home and select only what you think the class will find useful.

        Prepare a one-page memo telling your classmates who this person is. (See for memo elements and format.)

        Ask your neighbor to review the memo for accuracy; revise as needed.

        Present the class with a two-minute oral paraphrase of your memo and submit a copy of the memo to your instructor.

    Write a short memo to your instructor describing the role of teams in a company, organization, or campus group where you have worked or volunteered. Your memo should address questions such as what type of projects your team worked on, how the teams were organized, what worked, and what did not work.

Global Application

Technical documents are often read by international audiences. Some companies handle this issue by translating their documentation into multiple languages; other companies use a combination of words and pictures or just pictures. Find an example of technical communication written for an international audience. You might look at the instructions that came with your computer, cell phone, unassembled bookshelves, or other products (or look online for similar instructions). Write a short memo explaining what techniques the writer used to make the information useful for people who may not speak English or who speak English as a second language.
Digital and Social Media Application

Use the Internet to research examples of technical communication that are common in your profession or major. For example, if you are studying electrical engineering, what are the typical types of reports you might need to write when you get a job? See if you can find a sample report or other document that relates to your major. Using the Checklist for Effective Technical Communication on evaluate whether this document appears to be effective. Write a memo to your instructor explaining your findings. Include the Web address or other information about how to locate the document online.

