Chapter 11 Definitions
A photo shows text zoomed on the words “team work”.
Learning Objectives

    11.1 Explain the audience and purpose of definitions.

    11.2 Understand the legal, safety, and societal implications of definitions.

    11.3 Identify parenthetical, sentence, and expanded definitions.

    11.4 Use various methods to expand a definition, as the situation requires.

    11.5 Place definitions in your document.

Chapter Outline

    Audience and Purpose of Definitions

    Legal, Safety, and Societal Implications of Definitions

    Types of Definitions

    Methods for Expanding Definitions

    Placement of Definitions

        Strategies for Definitions

        Checklist for Definitions

    Applications

Definitions explain specialized terms or concepts and may be unfamiliar to people who don’t have expertise in a particular field. In many cases, a term may have more than one meaning or different meanings in different fields. Consider a word such as atmosphere: To a meteorologist, atmosphere refers to the envelope of gases that surrounds a planet (“the Earth’s atmosphere”); to a politician or office manager, the same word would typically mean the mood of the country or workplace (“an atmosphere of high hopes”); to a geologist, it would have to do with the weather conditions in a particular area (“the atmosphere of the Hawaiian forests is lush and volcanic”); to a physicist, it would stand for a unit of pressure (“a standard atmosphere is 101,325 pascal”); and to a novelist, it would be associated with the mood of a novel (“a gothic atmosphere”).

As you can see, precision is important, especially in specialized careers, in which field-specific terminology is common, and undefined terms may prevent the overall meaning of a technical document from making sense. Engineers talk about elasticity or ductility; bankers discuss amortization or fiduciary relationships. In a technical document, these terms must be defined if people inside and outside of those fields are to understand the meaning of the document as a whole. Imagine if a doctor continually used the words myocardial infarction in a patient brochure without ever defining the term. The fact that a myocardial infarction is the medical name for one form of heart attack would be lost on patients who might benefit from a clear understanding of the brochure.

Audience and Purpose of Definitions

    11.1 Explain the audience and purpose of definitions.

Definitions make a document usable for an audience by answering one of two questions: “What, exactly, does this definition entail?” or “What, exactly, is this process, item, concept, or technique?” The first question spells out for audience members how they are affected by the item defined. For example, a person buying a new computer needs to understand exactly what “manufacturer’s guarantee” or “expandable memory” means in the context of that purchase. The second question spells out for your audience what makes an item, concept, or process unique. For example, an engineering student needs to understand the distinction between elasticity and ductility. Inside or outside any field, people have to grasp precisely what “makes a thing what it is and distinguishes that thing from all other things” (Corbett 38).

Consider the purpose of using particular terms in your document by answering the question “Why does my audience need to understand this term or concept?” The level of technicality you use must match the audience’s background and experience. For a group of mechanical engineering students, your definition of a solenoid, for example, can be brief and to the point, and you can use highly technical language:

    A solenoid is an inductance coil that serves as a tractive electromagnet.

For general audiences, your definition will require language that is understandable by people who are not trained as engineers:

    A solenoid is a metal coil that converts electrical energy to magnetic energy capable of performing mechanical functions.

Unless you are certain your audience will grasp the exact meaning, always define a term the first time you use it.

Legal, Safety, and Societal Implications of Definitions

    11.2 Understand the legal, safety, and societal implications of definitions.

Precise definition is essential in technical communication; inaccurate or unclear definitions have legal, safety, and societal implications. Legal implications of definitions can be seen in documents such as contracts, which are are detailed, legally binding definitions of the specific terms of an agreement. If you lease an apartment or a car, the printed contract will define both the lessee’s and lessor’s specific responsibilities. Likewise, an employment contract or employee handbook will spell out responsibilities for both employer and employee. In writing an employee handbook for your company, you would need to define such terms as acceptable job performance, confidentiality, sexual harassment, and equal opportunity.

Definitions also have safety implications. From areas such as food safety to the safe use of equipment to the safety of assembling a new product, definitions play a key role. For instance, the U.S. government Web site on food safety needs to define concepts and terms such as minimum cooking temperatures, food poisoning, and listeria. These definitions must be brief and to the point, accessible to a wide audience, and written with a focus on what people can do to protect themselves and stay safe.

Clear and accurate definitions also help the public understand and evaluate the societal issues of specific technologies or scientific findings. For example, as a first step in helping people understanding the debate over genetic engineering, we need at least a very basic definition:

    Genetic engineering is the process of using recombinant DNA (rDNA) technology to alter the genetic makeup of an organism (EPA).

Of course, to follow the debate, people would need increasingly detailed information (about specific procedures, risks, benefits, and so on). But the above definition gets everyone started on course to a healthy debate by enabling us to understand the basic concept and agree on its basic meaning.

Types of Definitions

    11.3 Identify parenthetical, sentence, and expanded definitions.

Definitions fall into three distinct categories: parenthetical, sentence, and expanded definitions. When you define terms within a document, decide how much detail your audience actually requires in order to grasp your exact meaning: Do you need to quickly define a word in parentheses or in a sentence, or do you need to go into significant detail explaining a complex concept?
Parenthetical Definitions

Often, you can clarify the meaning of a word by using a more familiar synonym or a clarifying phrase in parentheses immediately after the word. This is known as a parenthetical definition and is used when a definition is relatively simple and doesn’t need detailed elaboration, as in these two examples:

    The leaching field (sieve-like drainage area) requires crushed stone.

    The trees on the site are mostly deciduous (shedding foliage at season’s end).

On a Web page or online help system, parenthetical definitions can be linked to the main word or phrase rather than placed in parentheses after the word. Readers who click on leaching field, say, would be taken to a window containing a brief definition. In a print document, words and phrases are often defined in a separate list of defined items, known as a glossary. (If the document is converted to PDF, those words and phrases can become links that send readers directly to the glossary.)
Sentence Definitions

A slightly longer way to define a phrase is to use the “term-class-features” method to form a sentence definition. Begin by stating the term. Then, indicate the broader class to which this item belongs, followed by the features that distinguish it from other items in that general grouping. Use a sentence definition when a concept requires further elaboration than a parenthetical definition could offer. Here are some examples:
Term 	Class 	Features
A carburetor 	is a mixing device 	in gasoline engines that blends air and fuel into a vapor for combustion within the cylinders.
Diabetes 	is a metabolic disease 	caused by a disorder of the pituitary gland or pancreas and characterized by excessive urination, persistent thirst, and inability to metabolize sugar.
Stress 	is an applied force 	that strains or deforms a body.

The previous elements may be combined into one or more complete sentences:

    Diabetes is a metabolic disease caused by a disorder of the pituitary gland or pancreas. This disease is characterized by excessive urination, persistent thirst, and inability to metabolize sugar.

Sentence definitions are especially useful if you plan to use a term frequently and need to establish a working definition that you will not need to repeat throughout the document:

    Throughout this report, the term disadvantaged student will refer to all students who lack adequate funds to pay for on-campus housing, food services, and medical care, but who are able to pay for their coursework and books through scholarships and part-time work.

Expanded Definitions

Brief definitions, such as parenthetical and sentence definitions, are fine when your audience requires only a general understanding of a term or when a term is not particularly complex to define. For example, the parenthetical definition of leaching field on page 194 might be enough to prevent reader confusion without providing excessive detail, or the above sentence definition of disadvantaged student might be enough to get a simple concept across. However, a document that requires more detail (such as a public health report on groundwater contamination from leaching fields) or a highly complex term would call for an expanded definition.

Depending on audience and purpose, an expanded definition may be a short paragraph or may extend to several pages. For example, if a device, such as a digital dosimeter (used for measuring radiation exposure), is introduced for the first time to an audience that needs to understand how this instrument works, your definition would require at least several paragraphs, if not pages.

Methods for Expanding Definitions

    11.4 Use various methods to expand a definition, as the situation requires.

An expanded definition can be created in any number of ways as described below. The method or methods you decide to use will depend on the questions you expect the audience will want answered, as illustrated in Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1

Questions to determine the best expansion approach
A figure shows the questions to determine the best expansion approach.
Figure 11.1 Full Alternative Text

As you read through the following sections, refer to the following sentence definition of the word laser, and consider how each expansion method provides further detail in a different way:

    A laser is an electronic device that emits a highly concentrated beam of light.

Etymology

Sometimes, a word’s origin (its development and changing meanings), also known as the word’s etymology, can help clarify its meaning. For example, biometrics (the statistical analysis of biological data) is a word derived from the Greek bio, meaning life, and metron, meaning measure. You can use a dictionary to learn the origins of most words. Not all words develop from Greek, Latin, or other roots, however. For example, some terms are acronyms, derived from the first letters or parts of several words. Such is the case with the word laser (derived from light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation); therefore, to expand the sentence definition of laser, you might phrase your definition as follows:

    The word laser is an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation and is the name for an electronic device that emits a highly concentrated beam of light.

History

In some cases, the history of a term, concept, or procedure can be useful in expanding a definition. Specialized dictionaries and encyclopedias are good background sources. You might expand the definition of a laser by describing how the laser was invented:

    The early researchers in fiber optic communications were hampered by two principal difficulties—the lack of a sufficiently intense source of light and the absence of a medium which could transmit this light free from interference and with a minimum signal loss. Lasers emit a narrow beam of intense light, so their invention in 1960 solved the first problem. The development of a means to convey this signal was longer in coming, but scientists succeeded in developing the first communications-grade optical fiber of almost pure silica glass in 1970 (Stanton 28).

Negation

Some definitions can be clarified by explaining what the term does not mean. For example, the following definition of a laser eliminates any misconceptions an audience might already have about lasers:

    A laser is an electronic device that emits a highly concentrated beam of light. It is used for many beneficial purposes (including corrective eye and other surgeries), not—as science fiction might tell you—as a transport medium to other dimensions.

Operating Principle

The following example not only defines what a laser is but also shows the operating principle behind it:

    Basically, a laser [uses electrical energy to produce] coherent light: light in which all the waves are in phase with each other, making the light hotter and more intense (Gartaganis 23).

Analysis of Parts

Be sure to list all of the parts to create a complete picture, and, if necessary, define the individual parts as well, as in the following expanded definition of a laser:

    A laser is an electronic device that emits a highly concentrated beam of light. To get a better idea of how a laser works, consider its three main parts:

        [Lasers require] a source of energy, [such as] electric currents or even other lasers.

        A resonant circuit . . . contains the lasing medium and has one fully reflecting end and one partially reflecting end. The medium—which can be a solid, liquid, or gas—absorbs the energy and releases it as a stream of photons [electromagnetic particles that emit light]. The photons . . . vibrate between the fully and partially reflecting ends of the resonant circuit, constantly accumulating energy—that is, they are amplified. After attaining a prescribed level of energy, the photons can pass through the partially reflecting surface as a beam of coherent light and encounter the optical elements.

        Optical elements—lenses, prisms, and mirrors—modify size, shape, and other characteristics of the laser beam and direct it to its target (Gartaganis 23).

Visuals

Make sure any visual you use is labeled clearly. Always introduce and explain your visual and place the visual near your discussion. If the visual is borrowed, credit the source. The following visual accompanies the previous analysis of parts:
A figure shows a diagram marked as Figure 1: Description of a Simple laser.

Source: Gartaganis, Arthur. “Lasers.” Occupational Outlook Quarterly.
11.4-1 Full Alternative Text
Comparison and Contrast

By comparing (showing similarities) or contrasting (showing differences) between new information and information your audience already understands, you help build a bridge between what people already know and what they don’t. The following example uses both comparison and contrast to expand on a more basic definition of a laser:

    Fiber optics technology results from the superior capacity of light waves to carry a communications signal. Sounds waves, radio waves, and light waves can all carry signals; their capacity increases with their frequency. Voice frequencies carried by telephone operate at 1000 cycles per second, or hertz. Television signals transmit at about 50 million hertz. Light waves, however, operate at frequencies in the hundreds of trillions of hertz (Stanton 28).

Required Conditions

In the following example, additional information on optics adds to the definition of a laser:

    In order to emit a highly concentrated beam of light, the laser must absorb energy through the reflecting end of a resonant circuit, amplify the photons produced between the reflecting and partially reflecting end of the resonant circuit, and release the photons as a beam of light via a set of lenses, prisms, and mirrors.

Examples

The following expansion using an example shows how laser light is used in medical treatment:

    Lasers are increasingly used to treat health problems. Thousands of eye operations involving cataracts and detached retinas are performed every year by ophthalmologists. . . . Dermatologists treat skin problems. . . . Gynecologists treat problems of the reproductive system, and neurosurgeons even perform brain surgery—all using lasers transmitted through optical fibers (Gartaganis 24–25).

Using Multiple Expansion Methods

Depending on the complexity of what you need to define, you may need to combine multiple expansion methods, as in Figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2

An expanded definition
A figure illustrates an expanded definition.
Figure 11.2 Full Alternative Text

Like a good essay, this multiparagraph definition is unified and coherent: Each paragraph is developed around one main idea and logically connected to other paragraphs. Transitions emphasize the connection between ideas. The level of technicality connects with the intended audience.

Because this definition deals with a vital community issue, the author uses multiple methods to ensure that readers have a solid basis for understanding the situation: A water reservoir is threatened by chemical see page and depleted by drought. This definition forms part of the introduction to a report that analyzes the severity of the problems and explores possible solutions.

To understand the problems, readers first need to know what a water table is, how it is formed, what conditions affect its level and quality, and how it figures into town planning decisions. The concepts of recharge and permeability are vital to understanding the problem, so these terms are defined parenthetically. This audience has no interest in geological or hydrological (study of water resources) theory. Audience members simply need the broadest possible picture.


