Chapter 13 Instructions and Procedures
A photo shows a man going through some papers on a pad in a work setting.
Learning Objectives

    13.1 Discuss the audience and purpose of instructions.

    13.2 Identify various types of instructions and their uses.

    13.3 Understand the safety and legal implications of instructions.

    13.4 Recognize the components of instructions.

    13.5 Write instructions with a readable style and accessible design.

    13.6 Know the audience and purpose of procedures and identify types of procedures.

    13.7 Test instructions and procedures for usability.

Chapter Outline

    Audience and Purpose of Instructions 

    Types of Instructional Formats

    Safety and Legal Implications

    Elements of Effective Instructions

    Content, Style, and Design Considerations

        Strategies for Readable Instructions

        Strategies for Accessible Instructions

    Procedures

    Conducting a Usability Survey

        Strategies for Instructions and Procedures

        Checklist for Instructions and Procedures

    Applications

Instructions spell out the steps required for completing a task or series of tasks (for example, installing more memory in your computer or operating an electron microscope). The audience for a set of instructions might be someone who doesn’t know how to perform the task or someone who has performed the task but can’t remember how or wants to perform it more effectively. In any case, well-written and carefully designed instructions enable readers to get the job done safely and efficiently.

Procedures, a special type of instructions, serve as official guidelines for people who typically are already familiar with a given task (say, firefighters who are evacuating a high-rise building). Procedures ensure that all members of a group coordinate their activities when performing a task. More so than instructions, procedures may need to be reviewed and approved by an official regulatory organization of some sort. For example, official medical procedures may need to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and a hospital’s safety and ethics board.

Instructions and procedures can be written and designed in a wide variety of formats, from detailed formats such as user manuals to shorter formats such as quick reference cards or online help. Most instructions and procedures are available as print and digital; for instance, PDF versions of consumer user manuals are typically shipped with the product and also available for download from a company’s Web site. In some cases, companies are skipping the printed manual altogether: Products are shipped with a small insert that says “visit our Web site,” where people can download the latest version of instructions or manuals. The format should be chosen based on the people who will be using the material (audience), what these people need to accomplish (purpose), and the environment where the material will be used. For example, instructions for connecting a battery charger to your car’s battery should not be provided on a CD because most people will not have a laptop computer handy while performing this task. Instead, these instructions should be printed directly on the charger itself, with a longer brochure (containing safety information) included in the box. A shorter “getting started” version should be made available online, too, in a format suitable for viewing on a phone.

Audience and Purpose of Instructions

    13.1 Discuss the audience and purpose of instructions.

Before writing instructions, find out how much your readers already know about the task. For instance, if you are writing for technicians who have performed a similar task but with a different piece of equipment, you may not need as much detail or context. If, on the other hand, you are writing for a general audience, such as consumers who are trying to assemble a new stereo cabinet or synch a new Bluetooth headset, you will need more details but in a less technical presentation. If you have a mixed audience (some experienced with the task, others less experienced), you will need a layered approach, offering a “quick start up” document for those in the know and a more comprehensive guide for the novices.

Readers across the globe, some who may not speak English as a first language, might use your instructions. Therefore, write in a straightforward style with plenty of visuals, and remain sensitive to cultural differences.

The purpose of instructions is simply to help people perform a task or series of tasks. As you write, keep the following questions in mind: “How is the task done?” “What materials are needed to complete the task?” “In which order should the steps in the task be completed?” “What could go wrong?” and “Are any safety issues involved?” Ask yourself if the primary purpose is to allow people to complete the task quickly (as when people are trying to assemble a new stereo cabinet and don’t want to take all day) or to complete the task incrementally and over a longer period (as when people are using a kit to test for radon in their homes).

Types of Instructional Formats

    13.2 Identify various types of instructions and their uses.

As discussed above, instructions and procedures alike come in many formats. The simplest kind of instructions provide one step that corresponds to one action, such as the following instructions for using an ATM machine:

    Step 	Action

        Insert ATM card

    	Card is swiped or goes into the machine

        Type in the PIN

    	PIN is accepted, next screen is displayed

        Select an action (cash withdraw, etc.)

    	User makes a selection

        Take the receipt or cash

    	User takes the item(s), screen indicates the session has ended

When you begin the process of writing instructions, start with simple steps such as the above, using active verbs, where one step results in one outcome. Use this idea as a basis for expanding and creating more complicated instructional formats, including user manuals, quick reference materials, assembly guides, Web-based instructions, and online instructions.
User Manuals

User manuals are the most comprehensive instructional format. Manuals contain instructions for using a product, along with descriptions and specifications, warnings and other safety information, maintenance and troubleshooting advice, contact information (such as an 800 number, email address, Web site, and social media connections), and other information the reader is likely to need. The more complex the product, the longer the manual’s size. Required regulatory information may also add to a manual’s length. Still, writers should strive to write and organize the information in as concise, clear, and readable a manner as possible.

Figure 13.1 presents a user manual cover page and table of contents, in this case, for a new front load washing machine. The material is presented in a visually appealing manner, using white space to help draw the eye into the text. Each section would be written and designed in a similar manner, using active verbs, clear descriptions, and relevant visuals. (For more on page design, layout, and the use of visuals, review Section 2, Blueprints). A “frequently asked questions” section can be written based on feedback the company receives. For instance, many companies use the content of customer phone calls and emails to create a list of the top ten consumer questions, then use these to improve the product and to give the technical writers some guidance about this section of the user manual
Figure 13.1

Table of Contents from a User Manual
A figure shows a user manual.
Figure 13.1 Full Alternative Text

Given the cost of printing and distributing large printed manuals, companies are increasingly providing smaller “Getting Started” guides that contain basic operating tips and then placing the more lengthy information online as a downloadable PDF or interactive Web page. Still, in many situations, especially for consumer products, people expect to find a user manual with the product, even if the information is also available online. Online manuals are very handy when customers lose or misplace the original copy. Also, if customers register their product and provide an email address, companies can provide easy access to revised versions of the user manual and related materials.
Quick Reference Materials

Quick reference materials are a form of instructions typically written and designed to fit on a single sheet of paper, a small or wallet-sized card, or a Web page. The instructions focus on the basic steps for people who only want enough information to perform a specific task.

Figure 13.2 shows a quick reference card to help people who speak too quickly while teaching (these same tips could apply to any kind of public speaking situation). The information is brief and easy to read. The three key actions start with active verbs and are indented, using bullets and white space to draw the reader’s eye to these sections. The card is available online and can be printed in different sizes, including a wallet size version, an index card size, or a full page. Readers can also cut and paste just the bulleted items to create a smaller version.
Figure 13.2

A Quick Reference Card
A figure shows a quick reference card, with a seal of the United States Office of Government Ethics on the top left.

Source: United States Office of Government Ethics, www.oge.gov.
Figure 13.2 Full Alternative Text

In this example, the action items do not need to take place in any particular order, so the writer used bullets. If the steps need to occur in order (such as with the ATM example, provided earlier, or with assembly guides, discussed later in this chapter), you would use a numbered format instead.
Assembly Guides

Assembly guides are a common form of instruction found with consumer products (such as furniture, home report items, appliances, and so forth). These guides describe how to assemble parts into a final product. Assembly guides can be a subsection of a larger user manual or can be a separate stand-alone document. Most assembly guides provide a brief overview, step-by-step guidelines (with substeps if required), and visuals. Readers will often skip over the text and look at the visuals first, to get an idea of what the final product our outcome should look like. For example, the visuals in Figure 13.5 show the end result of building a retaining wall.

Visuals such as these would typically be accompanied by step-by-step instructions about selecting the rocks, preparing the soil, and so forth. For example, the steps for the example in Figure 13.5 are written as follows (abbreviated here):

    “Measure and lay out the area…

    Dig a trench deep enough to accommodate…the first row of boulders.

    Set the first course of boulders into the trench…

    Backfill soil against the back of the first course…”

    (University of Minnesota Extension Service)

Substeps might be necessary if readers are novices and have never done any sort of landscaping before. For example, Step 2 might need a few substeps about how to dig a trench, which might include information on selecting the right shovels and other tools, using a level, or measuring with a tape measure. Step 4 might require substeps on how to properly backfill.

In cases where the instructions are not overly complicated and where the company has a global audience, wordless instructions may be the most appropriate approach. Wordless instructions are typically found with items such as furniture (a new bookshelf, for example). Usually, arrows are used to indicate action, and numbers are used to indicate steps.
Web-Based Instructions

Instructions that are set up as a Web page allow readers to click on hyperlinks to explore more information, access definitions of technical words and phrases, and learn more about topics they may not fully understand. Web-based instructions are useful in situations where your audience may be a mix of people who know something about the topic and people who don’t know as much. For instance, Figure 13.3 shows Web-based instructions for how to apply for Energy Star status for a building. Some readers may already be familiar with the eligibility requirements, but people who need more information can click on the link.
Figure 13.3

Web-based instructions
The figure shows a web page showing web based instructions.

Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Figure 13.3 Full Alternative Text

Web-based instructions are also useful because it’s easy for organizations to keep the information updated by simply revising the Web site (rather than, say, printing thousands of new brochures).
Online Instructions

Software, apps, and other online services have largely done away with user manuals and instead provide instructions that can be accessed directly through the app. Word processing programs (Microsoft Word, e.g.) offers a good example of online instructions. If you are working on a document and forget how to create a table or set up footnotes, you simply type your question or topic into the help box to access the instructions. This content is always up to date because it is linked to the company’s database of help information or is updated when your computer or software does an automatic update.

Online instructions are typically “context sensitive”—that is, the help system recognizes what you are trying to accomplish and not only provides instructions but also guides you to the menu function you are looking for.

Safety and Legal Implications

    13.3 Understand the safety and legal implications of instructions.

Instructional documents carry safety and legal obligations on the part of those who prepare them. In fact, of all the various forms of technical documents, instructional materials have the strictest requirements for accurate information in an accessible format. Technical writers must be very careful to obtain all relevant safety information from the legal and engineering departments and to incorporate this information into the document, including any required notes, cautions, warnings, and danger notices (see below).

Countless injuries result from inadvertent misuse of products such as power tools, car jacks, household cleaners, and appliances; the misuse is often traced directly to defective or unclear instructions. Accurate, easy-to-follow instructions that contain just the right amount of detail and are visually clear can prove to be the difference between the unsafe and safe use of a product.

Any person injured because of unclear, inaccurate, or incomplete instructions can potentially sue the writer as well as the manufacturer. Some of the legal liabilities resulting from faulty instructions include

    Failure to provide instructions and cautions for the proper use of a product: for example, a household cleaning product that should not be mixed with other products

    Failure to warn against hazards from proper use of a product: for example, the risk of cutting one’s fingers on a new type of vegetable slicer

    Failure to warn against the possible misuses of a product: for example, the danger of improperly installing a child safety seat
    
Elements of Effective Instructions

    13.4 Recognize the components of instructions.

Instructions may include a combination of the following parts: a title, a brief overview or introduction, a body section (including the required steps involved in following the instructions), and a conclusion. In addition, instructions should almost always include visuals and must include notes, cautions, warnings, and/or danger notices.
Title

Be sure your title provides a clear and exact preview of the required task. For example, the title “Instructions for Cleaning a DVD Drive” tells people what to expect: instructions for a specific procedure involving one selected part. But the title “DVD drives” gives no such forecast.
Overview or Introduction

Explain the purpose of the instructions and describe what these instructions do and do not cover. You don’t want to bury readers in an overly long overview/introduction, nor do you want to set them lose without adequate preparation. Know your audience—what people need to know and what they do not need to know. For example, you might begin with a short paragraph:

    These instructions provide complete information for the use of the lab’s electron microscope. The first section explains the setup steps, and the second section describes how to create a slide and view it with the microscope.

Body

Explain each step and sub-step in the correct order. For smaller instruction sets (less than 10 steps, plus or minus, with few or no sub-steps), just list the steps simply and accurately. But if the instructions contain a large number of steps and sub-steps, “chunk” these steps into logical categories (see pages 75–77 for more on chunking). For instance, you might have sections on Preparing the Soil; Arranging the Boulders; Backfilling the Wall. You could then start each of these sections with a brief overview sentence (“This section provides the steps necessary for preparing the soil before you begin building the wall”) followed by the steps and substeps.

Insert notes, cautions, warnings, dangers, and visuals as needed (see below for more on these elements). Keep the visuals as close as possible to the related steps or sections.
Conclusion

The conclusion of a set of instructions might summarize the main steps of the task, describe the results readers should experience, offer follow-up advice, or provide troubleshooting tips. You might do all of these things in the conclusion—or none of them. If the body section has provided all the necessary information, omit the conclusion altogether.
Visuals

Visuals in instructions play a vital role, as noted throughout this chapter. Visuals attract immediate attention, show people what to do, and help keep words to a minimum. (For more on visuals, see Chapter 8.) Visuals can illustrate any step that might be hard for people to picture. For instance, describing in words how to locate something is a lot less effective than simply showing the location with a drawing or photograph. Visuals can also help tell the whole story, offering the big picture in one glance, something that would be far less effective using words only. Figure 13.4 enables readers to visualize a task. Figure 13.5 shows readers the complete process at a glance.
Figure 13.4

A visual that illustrates a task (how to apply weatherstrip caulking)
A visual representation illustrates how to carry out a task.

Source: From the U.S. Department of Energy <www.nrel.gov/docs/fy01osti/28039.pdf>.
Figure 13.4 Full Alternative Text
Figure 13.5

A visual that shows the full picture (how to build a boulder wall) in one glance
A two-part figure illustrates how a boulder wall should be built.

Source: From University of Minnesota Extension Garden website, http://www.extension.umn.edu/garden/landscaping/ Copyright © 2017 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights reserved.
Figure 13.5 Full Alternative Text
Notes, Cautions, Warnings, and Danger Notices

Notes provide additional information, while cautions, warnings, and danger notices prevent damage, injury, or even death. Use these items only when needed. Overuse will dull their effect, and readers may overlook their importance.

A note clarifies a point, emphasizes vital information, or describes options or alternatives. For example:

    NOTE: If you don’t name a newly initialized hard drive, the computer automatically names it “Untitled.”

Notes are designed to enhance performance and prevent errors; cautions, warnings, and danger notices are used for safety reasons.

Cautions prevent possible mistakes that could result in injury or equipment damage. For example:

    CAUTION: A momentary electrical surge or power failure will erase the contents of internal memory. To avoid losing your work, set up the automatic backup function.

Warnings alert readers to potential hazards to life or limb. For instance:

    WARNING: To prevent electrical shock, always disconnect your printer from its power source before cleaning internal parts.

Danger notices identify an immediate hazard to life or limb. For example:

    DANGER: The red canister contains DEADLY radioactive material. Do not break the safety seal under any circumstances.

When you include cautions, warnings, or danger notices, be sure to provide the appropriate visual symbol or icon to indicate these conditions, as in Figure 13.6.
Figure 13.6

Caution, warning, and danger symbols
A figure shows the figures for various signs.
Figure 13.6 Full Alternative Text

Content, Style, and Design Considerations

    13.5 Write instructions with a readable style and accessible design.

In addition to including all the necessary elements in a set of instructions, you also need to decide about matters of content, style, and design.
Detail and Technicality

Readers who know a great deal about the product or task(s) to be covered don’t need a lot of detail and can typically handle a high level of technical information. But readers who are new to the situation need more detail and fewer technical terms. Use the techniques described in Chapter 3 to determine how much your readers already know.

Unless you learn that your audience has the relevant background and skills, write for more general readers. For example, if you are writing instructions for providing first aid to a victim of electrical shock, you might write the following for an audience with extensive medical background:

    First Aid For Electrical Shock

        Check vital signs.

        Establish an airway.

        Administer CPR as needed.

        Treat for medical shock.

But for an inexperienced audience, not only will the above details be inadequate, but also terms such as “vital signs” and “CPR” will be too technical. Such instructions posted for workers in a high-voltage area who are not medically trained would be useless. Illustrations and explanations would be needed, as demonstrated in Figure 13.7.
Figure 13.7

Adequate detail and technicality for a general audience
A figure illustrates a document showing adequate detail and technicality for a general audience along with figures.
Figure 13.7 Full Alternative Text
Style

Instructions must always be clear and easy to follow on first reading, because people usually take immediate action. Follow the Strategies below.
Strategies
for Readable Instructions

    Use direct address, active voice, and imperative mood. To emphasize the reader’s role, write in the second person, as direct address. Begin all steps and substeps with action verbs, using the active voice and imperative mood. In certain cases, you may want to provide a clarifying word or phrase that precedes the verb:
    Say this 	Not this
    Insert the flash drive. or [To access the files] insert the flash drive. 	You should insert the flash drive.
    Key in your access code. or [To log on,] key in your access code. 	The user keys in her access code.
    Plug in the power cord. or [When you are ready to power up,] plug in the power cord. 	The power cord is plugged in.

    Use short and logically shaped sentences. Use short sentences—one sentence for each step—so that readers can perform one step at a time. If a single step covers two related actions, describe these actions in their required sequence:

        Before switching on the computer, insert the CD in the drive.

    OR

        Insert the CD in the drive. Then switch on the computer.

    Use parallel phrasing. Parallelism is especially important in instructions because the repeating grammatical forms emphasize the step-by-step organization. Notice how all the sentences below are structured identically:

        To log on to the encrypted server, follow these steps:

            Switch the device to “on.”

            Press the CONTROL key and the C key simultaneously.

            Type “logon,” and then press the ESCAPE key.

            Type your user name, and then press the ESCAPE key.

    Use affirmative phrasing. Negative phrasing is harder to understand.
    Say this 	Not this
    Examine your circuit board for dust contamination. 	Verify that your circuit board is not contaminated with dust.

    Use transitions to mark time and sequence. Transitional expressions provide a bridge between related ideas. Some transitions (“first,” “next,” “meanwhile,” “finally,” “after,” “then”) mark time and sequence and are therefore especially useful in instructions, emphasizing their step-by-step nature. If your content needs to be written in prose format (for instance, if you can’t use a numbered list because of concerns with how the numbers might be formatted on a different screen or device), use transitions instead.

        First, plug in the power cord, and then turn on the printer.

        After the printer warms up, insert the paper in the paper slot.

        Finally, hit the “print” button.

Design

Instructions rarely receive undivided attention. The reader, in fact, is usually doing two activities more or less at once: interpreting the instructions and performing the required task.

An effective instructional design conveys the sense that the task is within a qualified person’s range of abilities. Therefore, design your instructions so that people can leave and return to the document as needed and easily find their place.
Strategies
for Accessible Instructions

    Use informative headings. Clear headings tell readers what to expect, emphasize what is most important, and provide cues for navigation. A heading such as “How to Format a DVD so You Can Record Training Videos” is more informative than “DVD Formatting.”

    Arrange all steps in a numbered list. Unless the procedure consists of simple steps, list and number each step. Numbered steps not only announce the sequence of required actions, but also help readers remember where they left off.

    Separate each step visually. Single space within steps and double space between.

    Make cautions, warnings, and danger notices highly visible. Use ruled boxes or highlighting and plenty of white space to make these items stand out. Also, include symbols, if possible; if not, use bold text and capital letters for emphasis.

    Make visual and verbal information redundant. Let the visual repeat, restate, or reinforce the prose rather than provide entirely new information.

    Place visuals and text that are connected close together. If room allows, place a visual that goes with a step right beside the step; if not, right after the step. Set off the visual with plenty of white space.

    Keep the design simple and easy to navigate. Readers may be overwhelmed by an excessively complex or inconsistent design.

    For lengthy instructions, consider a layered approach. In a large user manual, for instance, you might add a “Getting Started” guide or quick reference page that can be used on its own.

Figure 13.8 shows instructions that have been prepared for general readers who need to make a common home repair. This example illustrates a number of features described in this chapter, including the use of visuals, numbered instructions, notes and cautions, and clear prose intended to help a novice perform this task.
Figure 13.8

A complete set of instructions
A figure illustrates a complete set of instructions along with figures.
Figure 13.8 Full Alternative Text

Procedures

    13.6 Know the audience and purpose of procedures and identify types of procedures.

Procedures provide rules and guidance for people who are required to follow accepted practice. For example, different people in your organization might perform the same task (say, monitoring groundwater pollution) at different times, with different equipment, or under different circumstances. This task may need to be standardized to ensure that all work is done with the same accuracy and precision.
Audience and Purpose Considerations

Unlike instructions, which will be read mostly by people unfamiliar with the given task, procedures may be used by people already familiar with the task but who need to follow a standard. For example, if apprentice chefs in a famous restaurant who normally prepare salads and appetizers are asked to take over on the preparation of special sauces, those workers probably already know the basics but would need more information on the specific sauces required, amounts of ingredients, reduction techniques, and so on.

Determine how your readers will use these procedures. Will they be following the procedures in a hurry while evacuating a building? Would the procedures be better distributed as a wallet-sized card, on a Web site, or as a PDF that can be printed and sent as an email attachment? Once you know exactly how the procedures will be used, you can make decisions about the document’s length, format, level of detail, and medium.
Types of Procedures

The most common types of procedures are standard operating procedures (SOPs), general safety procedures, and medical or health procedures.

Standard operating procedures are formal procedures designed to give an organization an official record of the procedure and how it should be performed. SOPs, kept up to date and in a location or format available to employees, are required by law in many workplace environments, including those that deal with chemicals or industrial waste. SOPs are also written to inform the public about how a particular procedure is performed.

Safety procedures, as in Figure 13.9, are required in many settings. Hotel rooms typically list fire exit procedures on the back of the entry door. Most organizations have official procedures for dealing with emergencies.
Figure 13.9

A set of procedures (safety procedures)
A figure shows a set of procedures (safety procedures).

Source: U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Figure 13.9 Full Alternative Text

Medical procedures can be written for medical professionals or for consumers. Procedures for medical professionals might include SOPs on hand washing, surgical techniques, and other steps involved in patient care in the hospital. Today, with the vast amount of medical information available online, many medical procedures are written for nonexperts.

Conducting a Usability Survey

    13.7 Test instructions and procedures for usability.

Any technical document must be written and designed for the right audience. With instructions and procedures, however, accuracy and ease of use are especially important. Otherwise, readers could make costly and dangerous errors.

To identify which parts of the document work or don’t work, conduct a brief usability analysis, using the Basic Usability Survey in Figure 13.10. The survey is designed for both the writers and the readers. Essentially it asks one main question (broken into more specific questions): “Do these instructions or procedures enable you to carry out the task safely, efficiently, and accurately?” Notice how the phrasing encourages responses containing examples instead of merely yes or no answers.
Figure 13.10

A basic usability survey
A figure shows a basic usability survey.

Source: Adapted from Carliner 258; Daugherty 17–18; Hart 53–57.
Figure 13.10 Full Alternative Text

In larger organizations, usability testing may take place in a formal usability lab, where engineers and technical writers can observe people using the document, sometimes using eye-tracking software to see what sections people read most closely or using a one-way mirror and keystroke capture software to provide empirical evidence about elements of the instructions that are most useful versus sections of the document that cause the most confusion.

Input from a usability survey and a more formal usability test can be used to revise the document.
Strategies
for Instructions and Procedures

    Analyze your audience. For instructions, assume a general audience that does not know how to perform a task. For procedures, assume that your audience does know something about the procedure but needs a set of standard guidelines.

    Analyze your purpose. Consider where the document will be used and how to present the information for maximum usability.

    Become familiar with safety and legal implications. Instructions and procedures must always be written with reader safety at the forefront.

    Use a clear organizational format and include all needed elements. Always include a clear and exact title; include an overview or introduction for instructions (but only if appropriate for procedures); include a body section (in list format for instructions, but not necessarily for procedures); and include visuals, notes, cautions, warnings, danger notices, and a conclusion as appropriate.

    Provide an appropriate level of detail and technicality. Do not give readers too much or too little detail, and use only as much technical language as your audience will understand.

    Write with a readable style. Refer to the Strategies for Readable Instructions (pages 236–237).

    Design for maximum accessibility. Refer to the Strategies for Accessible Instructions (page 239).

    Analyze your document for usability. Instructions and procedures must be easy to grasp in one reading, lead to successful completion of a task or procedure, and ensure reader safety. Make sure each word and image is just right by surveying readers about the usability of the document.

Checklist
for Instructions and Procedures
Instructions

    Have I determined what type of instructional format I should use?

    Have I assessed the safety and legal implications of my instructions?

    Have I provided a clear and exact title?

    Have I included an orienting overview or introduction?

    Have I provided step-by-step instructions in the body?

    Have I used visuals to enhance usability?

    Have I included notes, cautions, warnings, and dangers whenever necessary?

    Have I provided the appropriate level of detail and technicality for my audience?

    Have I followed the strategies for writing with a readable style?

    Have I followed the strategies for creating an accessible design?

    Have I performed a Basic Usability Survey?

Procedures

    Have I considered my audience and purpose?

    Have I provided a clear and exact title?

    Have I provided a clear introduction and numbered steps or visuals, if appropriate?

    Have I included notes, cautions, warnings, and dangers whenever necessary?

    Have I provided a conclusion?

    Have I provided an appropriate level of detail, a readable style, and an accessible design?

    Have I performed a Basic Usability Survey?

Applications
General Application

Locate a technical manual for your field, or instructions or procedures for a general audience for a product you recently purchased. Using the Checklist above, evaluate the sample. In a memo to your instructor, discuss the document’s strong and weak points, and be prepared to explain them in class.
Team Application

Divide into small groups and go online to look for a quick reference guide for something you own (your cell phone or laptop; a coffee pot or other appliance; the office copier). Look for fairly brief instructions that could use revision for improved content, organization, style, or format. Make sure the instructions cover a task that you will be able to carry out. Try out the instructions, then use the Usability Survey to review and analyze. Revise the instructions based on the survey. Submit all materials to your instructor, along with a memo explaining the improvements, and be prepared to discuss your revision in class.
Global Application

In many cultures, the use of imperative mood is considered impolite or too direct. For instance, instructions that state “Place the flash drive into the USB port” may sound bossy and inconsiderate. Find a set of instructions that use imperative mood (for example, Figure 13.10) and rewrite these for a cross-cultural audience where imperative mood might be considered too direct. But in your revisions, be sure the instructions are still clear and to the point. For instance, you might use an indirect imperative (“Be sure to insert the flash drive into the USB port”).
Digital and Social Media Application

Think of a real situation in which you are trying to fix a product you own but can’t find the original user manual. For instance, you might need to access the password settings for your Wi-Fi router but not remember how to do so. Go online and find the user manual (Hint: You will need the device name, brand, and model number). How easy or difficult was it to find the manual and then find the information you needed? Based on ideas from this chapter, are there other ways the information could have been made available to make your task easier? Also, see if the manufacturer has a Facebook page or Twitter feed, and look to see if any instructional document updates have been provided through these social media sites. If so, are the updates easy to find?


