Chapter 2 The Research Process in Technical Communication
A photo shows a young woman reading in a library.
Learning Objectives

    2.1 Apply critical thinking to every stage of the research process.

    2.2 Understand the difference between primary and secondary ­research.

    2.3 Locate, identify, and assess the reliability and credibility of ­secondary sources.

    2.4 Consult primary sources via unsolicited inquiries, informational interviews, surveys, and observations.

Chapter Outline

    Thinking Critically About Research 25

        Strategies for Thinking Critically about Research 26

    Primary Versus Secondary Sources 27

    Exploring Secondary Sources 27

        Strategies for Finding Credible, Reliable Secondary Sources 32

    Exploring Primary Sources 33

        Strategies for Informational Interviews 34

        Strategies for Surveys 36

        Checklist for Doing Research 38

    Applications 38

All technical communication requires some degree of research, even if that research merely entails checking a fact or consulting a colleague before writing a memo, letter, or email. This chapter explains how to conduct more complex research for such technical documents as long reports and proposals. As you read, consider how research in technical communication often differs from research conducted in an academic setting.

Exploring Secondary Sources

    2.3 Locate, identify, and assess the reliability and credibility of secondary sources.

Research assignments begin more effectively when you first uncover and sort through what is already known about your topic before attempting to add to that knowledge yourself. To locate existing research and information on your topic, start with secondary sources such as books; journal, magazine and news media articles; government publications and other public records; professionally conducted surveys and interviews; blogs and wikis; and Web sites. These sources may be available online, in print, or both. Make sure the sources are credible and reliable (see the Strategies box on pages 32–33).
How to Locate Secondary Sources

Secondary sources such as the ones described above can be located by using various search tools. The two most common ways of locating secondary sources are searches done through a library and searches done using Google.

    Library searches. Public libraries as well as college and university libraries offer a range of search tools you can use to find secondary sources related to your topic. It can be helpful to start by meeting with a librarian to get an overview of how to use the library’s online public access catalog (OPAC) and to get some help in narrowing your search. Library searches will yield books, articles, and other materials available in that library as well as from other libraries via interlibrary loan. You can access the library’s OPAC from a computer located at the library or, if the library is set up for remote access, via the Web.

    Google searches. Google searches through millions of pages of content, including Web pages, government documents, online news sites, blogs, wikis, Twitter feeds, social media pages, and more. Google also has a large collection of digitized books (Google Books) and a specialized search for academic articles (Google Scholar). Google is a good way to start your search, but be careful to narrow your findings to credible, reliable sources and then to use these sources as a basis for more focused research (such as library research for books and peer reviewed reports or articles).

Types of Secondary Sources
General Commercial, Organizational, and Academic Web Sites

Google and other search engines locate a wide range of material, most of which will be commercial (.com), organizational (.org), and academic (.edu) Web sites. If the content within a commercial site looks directly relevant to your search, consider using it, but think critically about the information presented. Does the fact that the company is likely trying to sell you something affect the content? Be careful also of organizational Web sites that may be well researched but have a particular social or political agenda. Are the opinions expressed by the organization designed to sway you to their agenda? Academic Web sites tend to be credible. However, some academics may also have biases, so never stop thinking critically about what you find on the Web.
Government Web Sites

Most government organizations (local, state, and federal) have a Web site and online access to research and reports. Examples include the Food and Drug Administration’s Web site, which offers information on food recalls, clinical drug trials, and countless related items. State and local sites provide information on auto licenses, state tax laws, and local property and land issues. From some of these sites you can link to specific government-sponsored research projects. Be sure to check the dates of reports or data you locate on a government Web site, and find out how often the site is updated.
Online News Outlets and Magazines

Most major news organizations offer online versions of their broadcast and print publications. Examples include online versions of newspapers such as the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal, CNN, and National Public Radio. Major magazines, such as Time, Newsweek, Forbes, and other more specialized magazines also offer Web versions. Some news is available online only, as in the online magazines Slate and Salon. To locate these publications, do a Google search on the publication name.

Make sure you understand how the publication obtains and reviews information. Is it a major news site with careful editorial scrutiny and wide respect, or is it a less reputable site that looks great on the surface but is run by a special-interest group that takes wide liberty with the facts?
Blogs

Blogs are used by journalists, commentators, and others to post ideas and opinions about a wide range of topics. Postings and replies are displayed in reverse chronological order, with the newest topic first. Older posts can usually be viewed via an index or link. Links chosen by the owner also supply ways to connect to other blogs on the same or similar topics. Blogs are great for finding current information from individuals, companies, and nonprofit organizations that are knowledgeable about particular topics. You will find more blogs than you can use, so you need to evaluate the information on individual blogs carefully and decide which ones are most relevant and reliable.

Keep in mind that blogs nearly always represent the particular views of the blog author (whether an individual, company, organization, or academic institution) and of those who reply to the blog postings. Check any information you find on a blog against a professionally edited or peer-reviewed source.
Wikis

Wikis are sites that are used to collect information and keep this information updated. Most wikis allow readers to add to or edit content. The most popular wiki is Wikipedia; the theory behind Wikipedia is that if the information from one posting is wrong, someone else will correct it, and over time the site will reach a high level of accuracy and reliability. Keep in mind, however, that many wikis have no oversight. Aside from a few people who determine whether to delete articles based on requests from readers, wiki content may not be checked by editors for accuracy. Always confirm information you find on a wiki against several other peer-reviewed or traditional sources. See Chapter 19 for more on blogs and wikis.
Online Forums and Email Lists

For almost any topic imaginable, you will find a forum or discussion group, either on the Web site for the company or organization or on sites such as Reddit, Google groups, Yahoo groups, or even some Facebook pages. Large technology companies such as Apple and Microsoft offer Web-based discussion forums to help customers solve technical problems; health-related sites such as WebMD offer forums on specific illnesses and conditions. Email lists allow you to subscribe to a discussion related to a specific topic and receive regular emails in your inbox. As with blogs, you will find more forums and email lists than you could ever possibly use, so choose with care, especially when reviewing forums that are not moderated or subject to other editorial scrutiny.
Digital Libraries and Collections

Entirely searchable online, digital libraries and collections can be excellent research tools. Aside from the online sites sponsored by most public libraries, one notable digital library is the Internet Public Library, a partnership between seven major research universities. HathiTrust, also a partnership between several major research libraries, offers millions of digitized books and other documents. The Internet Archive is another site offering digitized and archived materials, including its “WayBackMachine,” which searches through all current and past versions of Web pages and other online materials. Balance your use of digital libraries with your own college or university or public library to be sure your search is yielding all possible findings related to your topic.
Periodical Databases

Almost all libraries have their own Web site where, if you are a library cardholder or a student, you can access a wide variety of periodical databases. Periodical databases are electronic collections of articles from newspapers, magazines, journals, and other publications. You can search these databases by title, author, keyword, and so on.

When searching a periodical database, narrow your search when you get too many hits or expand your search if you don’t find enough relevant material. Once you have typed in your keyword(s), you will be presented with a citation page that includes some or all of the following information: author(s), title, source, subject area, abstract (a brief summary of the article), ISSN (International Standard Serial Number—an identifier for the article much like a book’s ISBN), and DOI (or Digital Object Identifier—where the article can be found in digital format).

Some of the most popular general periodical databases include InfoTrac, NewsBank, ProQuest, and EBSCOHost, but there are also many specialized periodical databases in a variety of subject areas to which your library may also subscribe.

Before initiating a periodical database search, try to meet with your local reference librarian for a tour of the various databases and the instructions for searching them effectively. Also, be aware that some databases may not be accessible from school or home—you may need to visit your library in person.
Hard Copy Books and Periodicals

Any library will be well stocked with books as well as numerous print copy magazines, journals, and newspapers. The smaller and more general the library you visit, the less likely you are to find highly specialized print sources; the larger or more specialized the library, the more likely you are to find books by specialist publishers and periodicals that delve into more specific subject areas. Some older publications may be available on CD-ROMs and microfiche, but as time goes on, these publications continue to be digitized.

When consulting books and periodicals, be sure to check the copyright date and supplement the source with additional information from more recent sources, if necessary.
Reference Works

Reference works are general information sources that provide background and can lead to more specific information. Reference works may be available in hard copy but increasingly these publications are also (or only) available online. Because most of these secondary sources are available only by subscription, you’ll most likely need to access these at the library (although a number of the reference works mentioned here are accessible for free via the Internet Public Library or other sites, so be sure to check). Always look for the copyright date to make sure you are accessing the most current information available. The following items represent typical reference works you might access.

    Bibliographies. Bibliographies are lists of books or articles by subject field. To locate bibliographies in your field, begin by consulting the Bibliographic Index Plus, a list (by subject) of major bibliographies, which indexes more than 500,000 bibliographies worldwide. You can also consult such general bibliographies as Books in Print or the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature. Once you have narrowed your topic, you can consult specific subject area bibliographies topics ranging from engineering to medicine to history (and more).

    Indexes. Book and article bibliographies may also be referred to as indexes. However, other types of indexes collect information not likely to be found in standard bibliographies, such as indexes to conference proceedings (e.g., the Index to Scientific and Technical Proceedings), which collect the most current information in various fields not yet published in book or periodical form; patent indexes (e.g., the Index of Patents Issued from the United States Patent and Trademark Office and the World Patents Index), which collect cutting-edge technological descriptions not yet widely available to the public; and technical report indexes (e.g., Scientific and Technical Aerospace Reports), which also collect current information unavailable elsewhere.

    Encyclopedias. Encyclopedias are alphabetically arranged collections of brief articles. Wikipedia, discussed previously, is the most popular online encyclopedia; its entries are edited by a wide range of readers, both expert and nonexpert. Other encyclopedias, such as Encyclopedia Britannica or the Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, are subject to a more traditional editorial process and are not always available online except with a subscription. Once you’ve narrowed your idea, you can consult more specific subject-focused encyclopedias, such as Encyclopedia of Nutritional Supplements or the Encyclopedia of Business and Finance.

    Dictionaries. Dictionaries are alphabetically arranged lists of words, including definitions, pronunciations, and word origins. If you can’t locate a particular word in a general dictionary (e.g., a highly specialized term or jargon specific to a certain field), consult a specialized dictionary, such as Dictionary of Engineering or the Dictionary of Media and Communication Studies. Online dictionaries vary widely in their currency and detail; most researchers prefer the Merriam-Webster version.

    Handbooks. Handbooks offer condensed facts (formulas, tables, advice, examples) about particular fields. Examples include the Civil Engineering Handbook and The Electrical Engineering Handbook.

    Almanacs. Almanacs are collections of factual and statistical data, usually arranged by subject area and published annually. Examples include general almanacs such as the World Almanac and Book of Facts or subject-specific almanacs such as Baer’s Agricultural Almanac.

    Directories. Directories provide updated information about organizations, companies, people, products, services, or careers, often listing addresses and phone numbers. Examples include The Career Guide: Dun’s Employment Opportunities Directory; Hoover’s Company Capsules (for basic information); and Hoover’s Company Profiles (for detailed information).

    Abstracts. Abstracts are collections of summaries of books or articles, as you might find when searching a periodical database, but collected in one place. Abstracts can save you from having to track down a journal before deciding whether to read or skip the article. Abstracts usually are titled by discipline: Biological Abstracts, Computer Abstracts, and so on. For current research, you might consult abstracts of doctoral dissertations in Dissertation Abstracts International.

Gray Literature

Some useful printed information may not be available at any library. This content is known as “gray literature”—content that is not formally published and not usually catalogued in the library. Examples include pamphlets and brochures (e.g., medical pamphlets or company marketing materials); unpublished government documents (available under the Freedom of Information Act, with the exception of classified documents); papers presented at professional conferences; and self-published works. You can track down gray literature by looking at the Web sites for various organizations to see if brochures or the like are accessible and downloadable. You can also contact organizations to ask if they have anything available in your subject area. For instance, you might email a professional organization asking for papers on your topic delivered at its recent annual conference. Before doing so, know your research topic well and know specifically whom to contact and what you are looking for. Keep in mind that similar to some Web sites, gray literature is often not carefully scrutinized for content by editors. Therefore, the material may not be reliable and should be backed up by information from other sources.
Strategies
for Finding Credible, Reliable Secondary Sources

    Use more than one approach when searching. Google is a good starting point, but as you search, continue to narrow your topic and refine your search terms. Try Google Scholar, Google Books, and Google Images. Balance these searches with focused searches using the library’s tools and apps, and be sure to work with a reference or research librarian: These highly skilled professionals can help you understand what you are finding and teach you a thing or two about searching through the many, many sources you will find and determining what’s credible and reliable versus what is not.

    When searching, select keywords or search phrases that are varied and technical rather than general. Some search terms generate more useful hits than others. In addition to “electromagnetic radiation,” for example, try “electromagnetic fields,” “power lines and health,” or “electrical fields.” Specialized terms (say, “vertigo” versus “dizziness”) offer the best access to reliable sites. Still, check the source of the site and look for peer-reviewed or edited content (journal articles; reporting from credible news sites) to corroborate your findings.

    Consider the domain type (where the site originates). Standard domain types in the United States include .com (commercial organization), .edu (educational institution), .gov or .mil (government or military organization), .net (general usage), and .org (organization). A commercial site may be biased and thus not as credible as, say, an educational or research site. By finding and comparing information across different domains, you can begin to determine where the information is in conflict and where the information tends to agree.

    Identify the source’s purpose and sponsor. Is the intent of a particular source merely to relay information, to sell something, or to promote an ideology or agenda? The purpose and sponsor might alert you to a bias or a hidden agenda. A .com site might provide accurate information but also some type of sales pitch. An .org site might reflect a political or ideological bias. Looking for a source’s sponsor can also help you evaluate the content. For example, a Web site about genetically modified organisms (GMOs) by an organization called the Non-GMO Project may contain useful information but may also be biased toward one point of view, so you would want to balance this source with other information.

    Look beyond the style of a source or site. Sometimes, the most reliable material resides in less attractive, text-only publications, such as very plain Web sites or text-based books. Even though we tend to evaluate source credibility based on the way information looks, remember that a highly professional looking Web site, report, news item, or book is easy to create but that the look of the information does not necessarily indicate reliable content.

    Assess the currency of the source and its materials. When was the material created, posted, and updated? Many Web sites have not been updated in months or years. On social media, old news stories are often recirculated and people are all too willing to share the post before checking to discover that the story is actually from many years ago. Less credible online news sites bury the date at the bottom of the page, or in small print, so that readers are drawn into the headline and pictures and do not notice that the story is too old to be credible.

    Assess the author’s credentials and assertions. Check the author’s reputation, expertise, and institutional affiliation (university, company, environmental group). For Web-based sources, follow links to other sites that mention the author. Check to see if this author is only published in small, niche publications that cater to extreme viewpoints or if the author is widely published in edited, peer-reviewed sources. Where, on the spectrum of expert opinion and accepted theory, does this author fall? Is each assertion supported by solid evidence? Verify any extreme claim through other sources, such as a professor or expert in the field. Consider whether your own biases might predispose you to accept certain ideas.

    Don’t discount social media but don’t rely on it, either. Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, and other social media sites may provide some credible secondary source content (for instance, if a company representative makes a statement about a new product release), but typically these sources are more like starting points—places where you might read about a topic and get the gist of what people are discussing. You should then use these insights to research a balance of solid, credible secondary sources.
    

Exploring Primary Sources

    2.4 Consult primary sources via unsolicited inquiries, informational interviews, surveys, and observations.

Once you have explored your research topic in depth by finding out what others have already uncovered (secondary sources), supplement that knowledge with information you uncover yourself by doing primary research. Primary sources include unsolicited inquiries, informational interviews, surveys, and observations or experiments.
Unsolicited Inquiries

The most basic form of primary research is making simple unsolicited inquiries. Letters, phone calls, or email inquiries to experts can yield information that adds to, clarifies, or supplements information you already have. When making an unsolicited inquiry, be sure you contact the right individual or individuals. Don’t just contact a company or department. Also, prepare your ideas in advance, and ask exactly what you need to know rather than vague, general questions. As best as you can determine, ensure that what you ask is not confidential or otherwise sensitive.

Unsolicited inquiries by phone can be intrusive. Therefore, start with a polite, professionally worded email or private social media message (such as via LinkedIn or Facebook) to ask if the person would be interested in communicating with you about your research. If the person says yes, ask their preference for the communication (email, phone, Skype). Be prepared to limit yourself to one or two questions that don’t require extensive research or thought on the part of the person or persons you contact.
Informational Interviews

An excellent primary source of information is the informational interview, a solicited and extended form of inquiry. Much of what an expert knows may never be published. Therefore, you can uncover highly original information by spending time with someone and asking pertinent questions. In addition, an interviewee might refer you to other experts or sources of information.

Of course, an expert’s opinion can be mistaken or biased to some extent. Like patients who seek second opinions about serious medical conditions, researchers should seek a balanced range of expert opinions about complex problems or controversial ­issues—not only from a company engineer and environmentalist, for example, but also from independent and presumably more objective third parties such as a professor or credible, experienced journalist who has studied the issue. See the following Strategies for advice on effective interviews.
Strategies
for Informational Interviews

    Know exactly what you’re seeking. Write out a purpose statement. For example, “The purpose of my interview with Leslie Brown, clinical nutritionist, is to ask about her latest research on the possible links between certain genetically modified foods and childhood attention deficit disorder.”

    Do your homework. Learn all you can about the topic beforehand. Conduct a search about the person’s professional credentials and his or her area of expertise. If the interviewee has published anything relevant, read it. Be sure your questions don’t simply repeat the questions already answered in this person’s published materials.

    Request the interview at your respondent’s convenience. Find a time, location, and method (Skype; Google chat; phone; in person) that works best for your respondent. Ask whether the person objects to being quoted or recorded. If possible, email your questions beforehand.

    Make each question clear, specific, and open-ended. Don’t ask vague or general questions, and avoid questions that can be answered with a mere yes or no. Get the benefit of the interviewee’s elaboration.

    Avoid loaded questions. A loaded question invites or promotes a particular bias. For example, don’t ask, “In what ways do you think the hazards of genetically modified foods have been overstated?” Ask impartial questions instead, such as “In your opinion, have the hazards associated with genetically modified food been accurately stated, overstated, or understated?”

    Save the most difficult, complex, or sensitive questions for last. Leading off with your toughest questions might annoy interviewees, making them uncooperative for the remainder of the interview.

    Be polite and professional. If you are meeting in person, arrive on time, express your gratitude, and explain why you believe the interviewee can be helpful and how you will use the information. If you are meeting via Skype or another form of online communication, test your settings beforehand and make sure your technology is working properly.

    Let your interviewee do most of the talking. Be a good listener. This courtesy ensures that the interviewee will provide the most information with the least interruption or leading from you.

    Ask for clarification if needed, but do not put words in the respondent’s mouth. Questions such as “Could you go over that again?” or “What did you mean by that word?” are fine, but do not impose erroneous conclusions. Instead, paraphrase what the interviewee said so that she or he can verify your interpretation.

    Stick to your interview plan. If the interviewee wanders off topic, politely nudge him or her back on track (unless the information is useful).

    Ask for closing comments. Questions such as “Would you care to add anything?” or “Do you feel you’ve said what you wanted to say?” give the interviewee a chance to elaborate and clarify, and you may end up with useful additional information.

    Ask for permission to follow up. Additional questions may come to mind later, so find out if your interviewee would be willing to help with those new questions and, if so, what method is best (email, for example).

    Invite the interviewee to read your version of the interview. Inviting feedback in this way prevents you from possibly misquoting or misinterpreting the answers.

    End on time and thank the interviewee. Don’t drag the interview on longer than the interviewee expected. Be sure to thank the interviewee for his or her time (and follow up with an email doing the same).

    As soon as possible, transcribe your notes or recordings. Get the interview down in writing before you forget important details.

Surveys

Surveys help you form impressions of the concerns, preferences, attitudes, beliefs, or perceptions of a large, identifiable group (a target population) by studying representatives of that group (a sample). While interviews allow for greater clarity and depth, surveys offer an inexpensive way to get the viewpoints of a large group. Respondents can answer privately and anonymously—and often more candidly than in an interview.

The tool for conducting surveys is called a questionnaire. When you send the questionnaire, include a cover memo. See Figure 2.1 for an email cover memo that is professionally worded, concise, and brief. Using email allows you to attach the questionnaire as an attachment.
Figure 2.1

A Questionnaire Cover Email for a Questionnaire
FPO (For Placement Only) means that the content is not complete and will be completed later. (In Chaucer)

Source: Microsoft Outlook 2013.

Use the following Strategies to plan a survey and to develop a questionnaire.
Strategies
for Surveys

    Seek out expert assistance to design the questionnaire. A subject matter expert (for example, a professor of soil science if your topic is about groundwater levels) can help you create questions that are technically accurate. A survey design expert (for example, a researcher in the social sciences who designs questionnaires for a living) can help ensure that you have the right number of questions and the right sample size (see next item).

    Define the survey’s purpose and target population. Ask yourself, “Why is this survey being performed?” “What, exactly, is it measuring?” “How much background research do I need?” “How will the survey findings be used?” and “Who is the exact population being studied?”

    Identify the sample group. Determine how many respondents you need. Generally, the larger the sample surveyed the more dependable the results (assuming a well-chosen and representative sample). Also determine how the sample will be chosen. Will participants be randomly chosen? In the statistical sense, random does not mean “haphazard.” A random sample means that each member of the target population stands an equal chance of being in the sample group.

    Define the survey method. Decide how the survey will be administered—by phone, by mail, or online. Each has its benefits and drawbacks. Phone surveys yield fast results and high response rates; however, they take longer than written surveys, many respondents find them annoying, and respondents tend to be less candid when speaking with someone in person. Mail surveys are less expensive than phone surveys and promote candid responses, but many people won’t bother taking a trip to the mailbox or post office to return the survey, and results can be slow to arrive. Online surveys, conducted via sites such as SurveyMonkey or by emailing an attachment, are the least expensive and yield quick results, but you need to build in features to be sure the same person only responds to the survey one time (online survey tools are helpful with this aspect).

    Decide on the types of questions. Questions can be open-ended or closed-ended. Open-ended questions (“How much do you know about genetically modified food products?”) allow respondents to answer in any way they choose. Data gathered from open-ended questions are time-consuming to measure, but they provide rich information. Closed-ended questions (“Are you concerned about genetically modified food products? Yes/No”) do not allow respondents to elaborate on their responses. Data from closed-ended questions are easily measured but more limited in value.

    Develop an engaging and informative introduction. Thank the respondents; persuade them that the questionnaire relates to their concerns and that their answers matter; provide directions for completing the survey; and ensure the anonymity of respondents. See Figure 2.1 .

    Phrase questions precisely. Vague phrasing will only lead to inaccurate answers and findings. Avoid combining questions or asking the same basic question more than once.

    Avoid loaded questions. Do not invite or advocate a particular point of view or bias.

Observations and Experiments

Observations or experiments should be your final step because you now know exactly what to look for.

Observations are firsthand examinations of people, processes, places, and so on, using only your senses. When you make observations, have a plan in place. Know how, where, and when to look, and jot down your observations immediately. If you are observing in a public setting, you may wish to take photos or videos of what you observe.

Experiments are controlled forms of observations designed to verify assumptions (e.g., the role of fish oil in preventing heart disease) or to test something untried (e.g., the relationship between background music and productivity). Each field has its own guidelines for conducting experiments (e.g., you must use certain equipment, scrutinize your results in a certain way), and you must follow those guidelines to the letter when you conduct your own experiments.

Remember that observations and experiments are not foolproof. When making an observation or performing an experiment, you may be biased about what you see (focusing on the wrong events, ignoring something important). In addition, if you are observing people or experimenting using people as subjects, they may be conscious of being observed and may alter their normal behaviors.
Checklist
for Doing Research

    Have I maintained a high level of critical thinking while researching?

    Have I asked the right questions?

    Have I considered a balance of views?

    Have I explored my topic in sufficient depth?

    Have I evaluated each source for credibility and reliability?

    Have I interpreted my sources objectively?

    Have I conducted searches effectively, combining Google searches with library searches?

    Have I used critical thinking to assess online secondary sources?

    Have I supplemented findings from secondary sources with primary research whenever possible?

    Have I added my own findings to existing findings whenever possible?

    Have I kept careful and precise track of each source I am using?

Applications
General Applications

    Locate an expert in your field or your major for an upcoming project (such as a long report). Email that person and arrange for an interview. Follow the Strategies. Discuss your interview experiences and your findings with classmates.

    Use the following two approaches to locate research articles for your field or topic. First, conduct a Google search and then narrow your search using Google Scholar. Next, use your library’s search tools to locate two to three of the articles you found; download PDF versions of these articles if possible. Write a one-page summary describing your search process and your findings. Cite your sources and create a Works Cited (MLA) or References (APA) page (see Appendix A).

Team Application

In groups of three people, select a topic that might be suitable for one of the later assignments in this class (for example, a topic that could be used for the final proposal or formal report). Individually, each person should start a search using Google, then Google scholar, then your college or university’s online library search tool. Keep track of the time spent in each search, compare the ease of searching and quality of results obtained from each type of search on your group’s selected topic. Which approach yielded the most current sources? Which provided abstracts and full texts as well as bibliographic data? Which provided the most dependable sources? Which provided the most diverse or varied sources? Prepare a short report, and present your findings to the class.
Global Application

Global research can be easy to locate using social media. For example, you can visit the Facebook page and Twitter feed for the World Health Organization (WHO) and look for links to recent publications and studies. See if you can locate an actual study (hint: you will probably end up at the WHO Web site and their publications section). Download the information and review it carefully. With a focus on the international scope of the issue addressed in the study, create a list of questions you might ask of the publications’ author(s) during an informational interview. Write a cover email that you would use to request that interview.
Digital and Social Media Application

Select two to three Web or social media sites related to a research project for this or another class. Compile a working list of criteria based on these sites, then work as a group to expand your list. For example, do you consider good design to be an indicator of credibility? What else do you look for when assessing the relevance, currency, and validity of information on a particular site? How do you know if a site is commercially or politically biased? Present your results in class and compare the findings of the different small groups.

