Chapter 3 Providing Audiences with Usable Information
A photo shows a man, standing next to a white board, giving a lecture to a group of people.
Learning Objectives

    3.1 Analyze a document’s audience.

    3.2 Determine a document’s purpose.

    3.3 Identify the persuasive elements involved.

    3.4 Write a task analysis for a document.

    3.5 Consider a document’s setting, potential problems, length, format, timing, and budget.

    3.6 Create an information plan for a document.

    3.7 Understand the stages in writing, testing, revising, and proofreading a document.

Chapter Outline

    Analyze the Document’s Audience

        Strategies for Analyzing Your Audience

    Determine the Document’s Purpose

    Know How to Be Persuasive

        Strategies for Persuasion

    Create a Task Analysis for the Document

    Consider Other Related Usability Factors

    Develop an Information Plan for the Document

    Write, Test, Revise, and Proofread the Document

        Strategies for Proofreading

        Checklist for Usability

    Applications

A document’s usability is a measure of how well that document fulfills the information needs of its audience. Whatever their specific goals and concerns in using a particular document, readers must be able to do at least three things (Coe, Human Factors 193; Spencer 74):

    Locate the information they need easily.

    Understand the information immediately.

    Use the information safely and successfully.

To assess the usability of a manual that comes with your new gas grill, for instance, you would ask: “How well do these instructions enable me to assemble, operate, and maintain the grill safely and effectively?” To prepare a usable document, follow these six steps:

    Analyze the document’s audience.

    Determine the document’s purpose.

    Create a task analysis for the document.

    Consider the setting, potential problems, length, format, timing, and budget.

    Develop an information plan for the document.

    Write, test, and revise the document.


Analyze the Document’s Audience

    3.1 Analyze a document’s audience.

You cannot create an effective document until you first explore all you can about who will use your document. In other words, understand your audience. Ask these questions:

    Who is the main audience for this document?

    Who else is likely to read it?

    What is your relationship with the audience? Are there multiple types of relationships involved?

    How familiar might the audience be with technical details?

    What culture or cultures does your audience represent?

    What media format (printed manual; PDF available online; interactive Web page) is best for this audience?

Answer these questions by considering the suggestions in the sections that follow, and by filling in the audience portion of the Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet shown in Figure 3.1 before writing any technical documents. Also, have a look at the Strategies for Analyzing Your Audience on page 46.
Figure 3.1

Audience and purpose profile sheet
A figure shows an audience and purpose profile sheet.
Figure 3.1 Full Alternative Text
Primary and Secondary Audiences

When writing a technical document, keep two audiences in mind. Most documents are geared to an immediate audience. This is your primary audience. For instance, a set of instructions for installing new project management software for an office might be directed primarily at the information technology (IT) support staff who would be doing the installing. But most documents also have a secondary audience—those outside the immediate circle of people who will be needing the information directly. For example, a secondary audience for software instructions might be managers, who will check to see if the instructions comply with company policy, or lawyers, who will make sure the instructions meet legal standards.
Relationship with Audience

Besides identifying the primary and secondary audiences in a general way, you also need to understand your relationship with everyone involved. Are the primary readers of your document going to be superiors, colleagues, or subordinates? Determining which will help you decide the level of formality and authority to use in the document. Are they going to be from inside or outside your organization? Answering this question will help you to decide how confidential you need to be. Do you know your readers personally? This information can help you decide if you can adopt a more informal tone. Are they likely to welcome or reject your information? Knowing the answer will help you decide how persuasive you need to be. Are they a combination of people from various levels, both inside and outside the company? This knowledge will help you to determine how evenhanded your writing needs to be. Also, how might you speak to the needs of secondary audience members, who may be interested in or affected by your document?
Audience’s Technical Background

Any message can be conveyed in numerous ways, depending on how it is written and designed for different audiences. For example, information about a new cancer treatment may appear in a medical journal for health care professionals, in a textbook for nursing or medical students, or in a newspaper article for the general public. In each of these situations, a document’s technical level needs to use words and images at the right level for the intended audience.

For example, an audience of medical professionals will understand technical terms readily; an audience of medical and nursing students will have some familiarity with such terms but will be in the process of learning; and the general public may not understand technical terminology at all. Thus, articles written for each of these audiences will differ in terms of word choice, content, organization, illustrations, and page design.

The broader the audience, the more you must consider the various levels of expertise and language differences. For example, medical professionals can be divided into subgroups of specialists and general practitioners; medical and nursing students can be divided into subgroups based on years of training; and the general public can be divided into subgroups who read popular medical journals and those who have little or no familiarity with medical information. For the general public, even highly technical information is increasingly accessible online. Readers with little to no training may access specialized research reports and other information once available only to experts. In cases where you can’t be certain about the range of audiences who might read your document online, you can provide links directing readers to information written for people with different levels of technical expertise.

Consider the technical level of your specific target audience. One example of how to write and structure technical information for different audiences is visible on the Web site for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Figure 3.2 shows the main FDA page, which, in the upper right corner, offers links for readers from a wide range of backgrounds and levels of technical expertise (“For Consumers;” “For Patients;” “For Health Professionals;” “For Scientists and Researchers;” “For Industry”). People who click on “For Consumers” can search through many options on topics of importance, written using non-technical language. For example, consumers who click on links about childhood vaccinations will encounter the information you see in Figure 3.3, which is written in nontechnical language, uses short sentences, and refers to ideas that most if not all consumers will understand. But people who click on the “For Scientists and Researchers” icon will instead see information using more technical, expert language including a “compendium of analytical laboratory methods for food safety” or “health informatics.” Drilling down further into these categories, scientists will find even more technical information. In this way, the writers for this Web site have adapted the information to the different technical levels and needs of specific audiences.
Figure 3.2

FDA main page
FPO (For Placement Only) means that the content is not complete and will be completed later. (In Chaucer)

Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Figure 3.3

Excerpt of an article on the FDA “for Consumers” page
FPO (For Placement Only) means that the content is not complete and will be completed later. (In Chaucer)

Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Audience’s Cultural Background

Information needs and preferences often are culturally determined. Although it is not possible to generalize about an entire group of people from a particular culture or country, international communication experts have noted some characteristics can be helpful. German audiences, for example, often value thoroughness and complexity with detail included and explained in a businesslike tone. Japanese audiences generally prefer multiple perspectives on the material, plenty of graphics, and a friendly, encouraging tone (Hein 125–26). Western business culture generally values plain talk that gets right to the point, but Eastern cultures may consider this rude, preferring indirect, more ambiguous messages that leave interpretation up to the reader. The more you can learn about your specific readers for your specific document or information, the more you can consider how cultural differences might create misunderstanding in your situation and seek an approach that bridges these differences.
Strategies
for Analyzing Your Audience

    Picture your readers and exactly what they need and expect. Whether your audience is the company president or the person next to you in class, that person has specific concerns and information needs. Your readers may need to complete a task, solve a problem, make a decision, evaluate your performance, or take a stand on an issue.

    Identify the primary and secondary audiences, your relationship to them, and their technical and cultural background. Remember that if your document will be widely available via the Internet, you may need to add an explicit audience statement (“this material is written for the following audiences…”) and/or provide links that direct people of different technical backgrounds to information suited for their background and needs.

    When you don’t know exactly who will be reading your document, picture the “general reader.” General readers are impatient with abstract theories yet expect enough background to help them grasp your message. They are bored or confused by excessive detail and frustrated by raw facts left unexplained or not interpreted. Instead of trying to show readers how smart you are, make them feel smart. Whoever they are, readers need enough material to understand your position and to react appropriately.

    Anticipate readers’ questions. Based on their needs and concerns, readers have questions: What is it? What does it mean? What happened? Who was involved? When, where, and why did it happen? What might happen? How do I do it? How did you do it? Why is X better than Y? Can you give examples? Says who? So what? Give readers what they need to know.

    Recognize that audiences are not merely passive recipients of information. Technical communicators and their audiences should overlap and interact. Therefore, as you analyze and learn about your audience, remember that the communication process works both ways, especially in online settings where readers are invited to leave feedback and ask questions. Use this information to refine and update your document based on what you learn from these readers.

Determine the Document’s Purpose

    3.2 Determine a document’s purpose.

To create an effective technical document you need to understand how readers will use it. In other words, determine your purpose. Ask these questions:

    What is the main purpose of the document?

    What other purpose or purposes does the document serve?

    What will readers do with this information?

Answer these questions by considering the suggestions in the sections that follow and by filling in the purpose portion of the Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet shown in Figure 3.1 before writing any technical document. You can revise this Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet to suit your particular project, situation, and document.
Primary and Secondary Purposes

All forms of technical communication are intended to fulfill a specific primary purpose. As discussed in Chapter 1, the primary purpose (to inform, to instruct, or to persuade) will affect the document’s overall shape and substance.

Many documents have a primary purpose and one or more secondary purposes. For example, the primary purpose in most instruction manuals is to instruct; that is, to teach an audience how to assemble or use the product. But for ethical and legal reasons, companies also want people to use the product safely. A manual for a power tool or a lawnmower, for instance, typically begins with a page that spells out safety hazards before instructing readers how to assemble and use the mechanism.

In planning a document, work from a clear statement of purpose that takes into account both the primary and secondary purposes. For example, “The purpose of my document is to inform my readers of the new absentee policy and to instruct them on how to follow the procedures properly,” or “The purpose of my document is to inform my readers about the new antivirus software as well as to instruct them on how to install the software and to persuade them of the importance of running weekly virus scans.”
Intended Use of the Document

In addition to determining purposes of a document from your own perspective, also consider how and why it will be used by others. Answer a variety of questions: Do my readers simply want to learn facts or understand concepts? Will they use my information in making some decision? Will people act immediately on the information? Do they need step-by-step instructions? In my audience’s view, what is most important about this document? How and where will they use the document (outdoors while trying to assemble a new gas grill or tool shed? On their computer or phone as a PDF document while trying to fix a flat tire or install new software?) In addition to asking yourself these questions, try asking members of your audience directly, so you can verify what they want to know and where and how they will use the document.


Know How to Be Persuasive

    3.3 Identify the persuasive elements involved.

In the workplace, we rely on persuasion daily: to win coworker support, to attract clients and customers, to request funding. An email, a memo, a product description, or a set of instructions can be an implicitly persuasive document. Even the most complex report, which at first glance may appear to be “all facts,” can be persuasive because the writer probably shaped the report to favor a particular interpretation of the data.

Changing someone’s mind is never easy—in fact, sometimes it is impossible. Your success will depend on what you are requesting, who you are trying to persuade, and how entrenched those people are in their own views.
Using Claims as a Basis for Persuasion

Explicit persuasion is required whenever you tackle an issue about which people disagree. Assume, for example, that you are Manager of Employee Relations at Softbyte, a software developer whose recent sales have plunged. To avoid layoffs, the company is trying to persuade employees to accept a temporary cut in salary. As you plan your various memos and presentations on this volatile issue, you must first identify your major claim or claims (a claim is a statement of the point you are trying to prove).

For example, in the Softbyte case, you might first want employees to recognize and acknowledge facts about which they may have been unaware or have ignored:

    Because of the global recession, our software sales in two recent quarters have fallen nearly 30 percent, and earnings should remain flat all year.

Even when a fact is obvious, people often disagree about what it means or what should be done about it. And so you might want to influence their interpretation of the facts:

    Reduced earnings mean temporary layoffs for roughly 25 percent of our staff. But we could avoid layoffs entirely if each of us at Softbyte would accept a 10 percent salary cut until the market improves.

And eventually you might want to ask for direct action:

    Our labor contract stipulates that such an across-the-board salary cut would require a two-thirds majority vote. Once you’ve had time to examine the facts, we hope you’ll vote “yes” on next Tuesday’s ballot.

As you present your case, you will offer support for your claims before you finally ask readers to take the action you favor.

Whenever people disagree about what the facts are or what the facts mean or what should be done, you need to make the best case for your own view by presenting an argument that is not only well supported but that also connects with your audience.
Connecting with Your Audience

Determine how best to connect with your audience. Persuasive people know when to simply declare what they want (get the reader to comply with what you say), when to reach out and create a relationship (get the reader to identify with what you say), when to appeal to reason and common sense (get the reader to internalize what you say), and when to employ some combination of these approaches (Kipnis and Schmidt 40–46). These three approaches, respectively, can be labeled the power connection, the relationship connection, and the rational connection, as illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4

Three approaches for connecting with an audience
A figure illustrates three approaches for connecting with an audience.
Figure 3.4 Full Alternative Text

To get a better understanding of these three different approaches, consider the following scenario: Your Company, XYZ Engineering, has just developed a fitness program based on findings that healthy employees work better, take fewer sick days, and cost less to insure. This program offers clinics for smoking cessation, stress reduction, and weight loss, along with group exercise.

In your second month on the job, you read this notice in your email:

    TO: Employees at XYZ.com

    FROM: GMaximus@XYZ.com

    DATE: June 6, 20xx

    SUBJECT: Physical Fitness

    On Monday, June 10, all employees will report to the company gymnasium at 8:00 a.m. for the purpose of choosing a walking or jogging group. Each group will meet for 30 minutes three times weekly during lunch time.

How would you react to the previous notice? Despite the reference to “choosing,” the recipients of this memo are given no real choice. They are simply ordered to show up at the company gymnasium. Typically used by bosses and other authority figures, this type of approach does get people to comply, but it also almost always alienates them.

Suppose instead you receive this next version of the memo. How would you react in this instance?

    TO: Employees at XYZ.com

    FROM: GMaximus@XYZ.com

    DATE: June 6, 20xx

    SUBJECT: An Invitation to Physical Fitness

    I realize that most of you spend your lunch hour on your phone, reading, or just enjoying a bit of well-earned relaxation in the middle of a hectic day. But I’d like to invite you to join our lunchtime walking/jogging club.

    We’re starting this club in the hope that it will be a great way for us all to feel better. Why not give it a try?

This second version conveys the sense that “we’re all in this together.” Instead of being commanded, readers are invited to participate in the exercise program. Someone who seems likable and considerate offers readers a real choice.

Often, the biggest variable in a persuasive message is the reader’s perception of the writer. Readers are more open to people they like and trust. The relationship connection often works for this reason, and it is especially vital in cross-cultural ­communication—as long as it does not sound too “chummy” and informal to carry any real authority.

Of course, you would be unethical using a relationship connection merely to hide the fact that you have no evidence to support your claim (R. Ross 28). People need to find the claim believable (“Exercise will help me feel better”) and relevant (“I personally need this kind of exercise”).

Here is a third version of the memo. As you read, think about the ways in which its approach differs from the first two examples.

    TO: Employees at XYZ.com

    FROM: GMaximus@XYZ.com

    DATE: June 6, 20xx

    SUBJECT: Invitation to Join One of Our Jogging or Walking Groups

    I want to share a recent study from the New England Journal of Medicine, which reports that adults who walk two miles a day could increase their life expectancy by as much as three years.

    Other research shows that 30 minutes of moderate aerobic exercise, at least three times weekly, has a significant and long-term effect in reducing stress, lowering blood pressure, and improving job performance.

    As a first step in our exercise program, XYZ Engineering is offering a variety of daily jogging groups: The One-Milers, Three-Milers, and Five-Milers. All groups will meet at designated times on our brand-new quarter-mile, rubberized clay track.

    For beginners or skeptics, we’re offering daily two-mile walking groups. For the truly resistant, we offer the option of a Monday–Wednesday–Friday two-mile walk.

    Coffee and lunch breaks can be rearranged to accommodate whichever group you select.

    Why not take advantage of our hot new track? As small incentives, XYZ will reimburse anyone who signs up as much as $100 for running or walking shoes and will even throw in an extra 15 minutes for lunch breaks. And with a consistent turnout of 90 percent or better, our company insurer may be able to eliminate everyone’s $200 yearly deductible in medical costs.

This version conveys respect for the reader’s intelligence and for the relationship. With any reasonable audience, the rational connection stands the best chance of success.

For more on persuasion, see the Strategies that follow.
Strategies
for Persuasion

    Identify your specific goal. What exactly do you want readers to do: change their opinion, change their behavior, or take specific action?

    Anticipate your audience’s reaction. Typically, when you try to change people’s minds or get them to do something, they will naturally resist. Try to address their biggest objections beforehand. Will people be surprised, annoyed, or angry at your attempt? Will they agree with you in essence but want to know further details? Be careful to express your arguments (“We could do better”) without making people defensive (“It’s all your fault”). Also, be prepared to field negative reactions after your message is delivered and to back off if your message is rejected.

    Don’t ask for too much. No matter how persuasive you are, if you ask for what seems like too much, your argument will fail. Ask for what your audience will consider reasonable, not outlandish. Consider what is achievable in this situation.

    Allow for give-and-take. Be flexible in your argument. Indicate you are able to see your argument from the recipient’s point of view, and offer possible alternatives or compromises along with what you want to accomplish.

    Recognize constraints. For various reasons other than their personal opinions, recipients may be unable to comply with your request. For example, readers may have time constraints, organizational constraints (deadlines, budgets), legal constraints (agreements, laws), ethical constraints (when the request is legal but not necessarily ethical), and social and psychological constraints (shyness, fear of failure, fear of disruption, fear of the unknown).

    Consider the cultural context. How people react to your persuasive appeals may be culturally based. Will some audience members feel that your message ignores customs? Will they be offended by too many facts and figures without a relationship connection? Will they be offended by a direct approach? Remember that cultural groups consist not only of racial and ethnic groups but also groups connected by religious or spiritual views, sexual orientation, physical ability, and so on.

    Choose the right time and the right medium. Consider how the timing of your message (just prior to a vacation, during the busy season, during a period of optimism) and the way in which it is delivered (in person, over email, in a printed memo) will affect how positively it is received.

    Connect with your audience. Using the power connection may work but will likely alienate your audience; using the relationship connection may appeal to readers but fail to convince them. Whenever possible, use the rational connection or, even better, a rational connection combined with a relationship connection.


Create a Task Analysis for the Document

    3.4 Write a task analysis for a document.

Most technical documents entail a series of tasks to be completed, tasks most evident in a set of instructions: If people want to change an oil filter, assemble a new gas grill, or install a new project management app, they must follow a step-by-step procedure. Less obvious is that other documents, such as reports, memos, and brochures, also involve a series of tasks. For instance, when reading a report, a manager may need to extract information and write a response. Similarly, a technician may need to make a persuasive argument as to why the company should purchase new equipment. In short, most technical communication is task-oriented. People come to the information wanting to do something, and you want to ensure they achieve their goal; therefore, you need to think through the step-by-step nature of your document before you write it by creating a task analysis.

For your task analysis, you can create a worksheet similar to the one shown in Figure 3.5. Begin by defining the main tasks. For example, in planning an instruction manual to accompany a gas grill, you might start your task analysis by defining the main tasks as “assemble the grill,” “use the grill,” and “maintain the grill” and then divide these larger tasks into several smaller tasks, or subtasks (“locate all parts,” “get the required tools,” “lay out parts in order,” etc.). Note that both the tasks and subtasks should be listed using active verb forms (assemble, locate, get, and so on).
Figure 3.5

Sample task analysis for an instructional manual
A figure shows sample task analysis for an instructional manual.
Figure 3.5 Full Alternative Text

You can determine these tasks by interviewing customers and watching them perform each step to complete the project (Figure 3.6). Your document will be most useful if you know what your audience needs to do in order to produce the desired results.
Figure 3.6

Sample information plan
A figure shows a sample information plan.
Figure 3.6 Full Alternative Text

Consider Other Related Usability Factors

    3.5 Consider a document’s setting, potential problems, length, format, timing, and budget.

Once you’ve answered questions about audience (Who?), purpose (Why?), and tasks (How?), it’s time to consider smaller but no less important factors that influence the usability of your document: setting (Where?), potential problems (What are the hazards?), length (How much information?), format (Print? PDF? Interactive Web page or app?), timing (When?), and budget (How much money?).
Setting

Will distractions or interruptions make it hard for people to pay attention? Will readers always have the document in front of them? Will they be scanning the document, studying it, or memorizing it? Will they read page by page or consult the document randomly?
Potential Problems

How might the document be misinterpreted or misunderstood? Are there potential “trouble spots” (material too complex for this audience, hard to follow, or packed with information)? Are any important points missing? Anticipating problems is important in creating any technical document but especially in a set of instructions; therefore, when preparing instructions plan on background research. In planning the gas grill instruction manual, for example, learn all you can about the typical audience for this information (age, education, and so on). If possible, observe first-time operators using the instructions for a previous model and then ask for their feedback. Also, find out how most injuries occur, check company records for customer complaints, get feedback from dealers, and ask your legal department about prior injury claims by customers.
Length

How much information is enough? This depends on what you can learn about your audience’s needs. Were you asked to “keep it short” or to “be comprehensive”? Are people more interested in conclusions and recommendations, or do they want everything spelled out? If you can observe people using draft versions of your document, you will quickly be able to see when a section is too long versus when you have not included enough information.
Format

Does your audience expect a letter, a memo, a short report, or a long, formal report with supplements (title page, table of contents, appendices, and so on—see pages 294–306)? Can visuals and page layout (charts, graphs, drawings, headings, lists) make the material more accessible? Should the document be made available only in PDF format, online, where readers can make print copies if they wish? Or is there a legal or other reason why you need to include a print copy?
Timing

Does your document have a deadline? Workplace documents almost always do. Is there a best time to submit it? Do you need to break down the deadline into a schedule of milestones? Will any of your information become outdated if you wait too long to complete the document?
Budget

Does your document have a budget? If so, how much? Where can you save money? How much time can your company afford to allot you for creating the document? How much money can you spend obtaining permission to use materials from other sources? How much can you spend on printing, binding, and distributing your document? How much of the budget is dedicated to creating digital documents or a Web site or app to go along with (or take the place of) the document?

Develop an Information Plan for the Document

    3.6 Create an information plan for a document.

Once you have a clear picture of the audience, purpose, tasks, and related factors, you can draft an information plan: an outline based on the previous considerations in this chapter. Information plans can be as short as a two- to three-page memo or as long as a multipage report, depending on your project. Begin with a clearly stated purpose statement (“People will be able to assemble a gas grill within 30 minutes”) so you can measure when a task has been successfully completed (Rubin 97). Also include information about the audience, tasks, setting, potential problems, length, format, timing, and budget.

Figure 3.6 is a sample information plan created in a short-memo format for the gas grill instructions. Note how this plan takes into account not just audience, purpose, and tasks (each get their own section), but also all the related factors (some of which are implied):

    Setting. Although not spelled out, it is understood that people will be reading the instructions while assembling their grills, which the authors have accounted for via the document’s simple, lightweight design.

    Potential problems. Although safety issues are not given their own subheaded section, the authors have considered safety measures at a number of points.

    Length. In the “Rough outline” section, the authors have determined that the instructions will be four pages long.

    Format. In the “Rough outline” section, both text and visuals have been carefully considered, page by page.

    Timing. In the “Schedule” section, the authors have not only accounted for the due date but also the various milestones to be reached along the way.

    Budget. Under the “Production guidelines” section, the authors note that the budget will not allow for color printing or photographs but that color can be used in the online, PDF version.
    
Write, Test, Revise, and Proofread the Document

    3.7 Understand the stages in writing, testing, revising, and proofreading a document.

When your planning is completed, you will be ready to write, test, revise, and proofread your document. For a gas grill manual, you would write the instructions and design the graphics as you’ve planned and select a medium (print, CD, Web—or some combination) for distributing the information.

Once you have a workable draft, test the document on potential readers, if ­possible. Ask people what they find useful and what they find confusing. If you have created a draft set of instructions, watch people use the document and measure their ability to perform the task based on what you have written. If someone trying to ­assemble the gas grill, for instance, could not locate a part because of unclear instructions, knowing about this would be valuable as you revise your material. Ask respondents to identify specific difficulties they encountered in reading the instructions and in performing the task:

    Content. Are there any inaccuracies? Is the level of technicality appropriate to this audience? Are claims, conclusions, or recommendations supported by evidence? Are all key terms defined? Is the material free of gaps, foggy areas, or needless details?

    Organization. Is the structure of the document visible at a glance? Is anything out of order or hard to find or follow? Is the material “chunked” into easily digestible parts? Is the material organized in a logical sequence?

    Style. Is anything hard to understand, imprecise, too complex, or too wordy? Are sentences put together with enough variety? Is the tone appropriate for the situation? Are words chosen for exactness, not for camouflage?

    Layout and visuals. Are there adequate aids to navigation (heads, numbered lists, bullets, type styles)? Are there any excessively long paragraphs, lists, or steps? Are any visuals overly complex or misleading? Could anything be clarified by a visual? Is anything cramped and hard to read?

    Ethical, legal, and cultural considerations. Is there any distortion or misrepresentation of facts? Are there any potential legal or safety concerns?

Based on feedback, revise your plan and your draft document. Finally, proofread your document carefully. Regardless of how engaging and informative a document is, basic errors distract the reader and make the writer look careless. Proofreading is vital in detecting easily correctable errors such as these:

    Sentence errors, such as fragments, comma splices, or run-ons

    Punctuation errors, such as missing apostrophes or excessive commas

    Usage errors, such as “it’s” for “its”; “lay” for “lie”; or “their” for “there”

    Mechanical errors, such as misspelled words, inaccurate dates, or incorrect abbreviations

    Formatting errors, such as missing page numbers, inconsistent spacing, or incorrect form of documenting sources

    Typographical errors (typos), such as repeated or missing words or letters, missing word endings (say, -s or -ed or -ing), or an omitted quotation mark

Follow these Strategies for proofreading and refer to the Brief Handbook (Appendix B) for more information:
Strategies
for Proofreading

    Save it for the final draft. Proofreading previous drafts might cause writer’s block and distract you from the document’s rhetorical features (content, organization, style, and design).

    Take a break before proofreading your final document. Revisit your document with a fresh, rested pair of eyes.

    Work from hard copy. Research indicates that people read more perceptively (and with less fatigue) from a printed page than from a computer screen.

    Keep it slow. Read each word—don’t skim. Slide a ruler under each line or move backward through the document, sentence by sentence. For a long document, read only small chunks at one time.

    Be especially alert for problem areas in your writing. Do you have trouble spelling? Do you get commas confused with semicolons? Do you make a lot of typos? Make one final pass to check on any problem areas like these.

    Proofread more than once. The more often you proofread, the more likely you will catch all errors.

    Never rely only on autocorrect. A synonym found by your app’s autocorrect function may distort your meaning, and a spell checker cannot differentiate among correctly spelled words such as “their,” “they’re,” and “there” or “nope” versus “hope.” In the end, nothing can replace your own careful proofreading.

Checklist
for Usability

    Have I identified my exact audience (primary and secondary)?

    Have I identified my relationship with this audience?

    Have I identified this audience’s technical background?

    Have I identified the exact purpose of this document (primary and secondary)?

    Am I seeking an outcome that is achievable in this situation?

    Have I anticipated my audience’s reaction?

    Have I stated my claim clearly?

    Have I supported my claim with convincing evidence?

    Have I considered the various constraints and the cultural context?

    Have I chosen the approach most likely to connect with my audience?

    Have I written a purpose statement?

    Do I know exactly how this information will be used and in what format (digital, print, both)?

    By creating a task analysis, have I identified the steps involved?

    Have I pinpointed the main tasks and the subtasks?

    Have I considered the document’s setting, potential problems, length, format, timing, and budget?

    Have I developed an information plan that outlines all the preceding factors?

    After drafting the document, have I tested it with potential readers?

    Have I identified any problems in terms of content, organization, style, layout and visuals, and ethical/legal/cultural/persuasive considerations?

    Did I make needed revisions based on testing?

    Have I proofread the document carefully?

Applications
General Applications

    Identify an activity that could require instructions for a nonexpert to complete (for instance, someone who has no automotive repair experience might need to change a tire). Prepare a task analysis for this activity similar to the one in Figure 3.6. Exchange your task analysis with another student in your class, and critique each other’s work. With your class, discuss the challenges of doing such an analysis and identify strategies for performing a task analysis effectively.

    Online, find a set of instructions that appear easy to use. Identify specific characteristics of the document, including any persuasive elements, that make it usable. (Refer to the usability questions on page 56 to guide your assessment.) Then find a set of instructions that is hard to use. What characteristics make it unusable? In a memo to your instructor, define specific changes you would make in revising the documents. Submit both examples with your memo.

Team Application

Bring in some children’s connecting blocks, such as TinkerToys or Legos. Form teams of four to six people, and assign two people as technical writers. The technical writers should assemble a few of the pieces into a simple design (don’t use more than three or four pieces). Then the technical writers should write up a quick instruction card explaining how to assemble the pieces into the design they’ve created. For example, the card for Lego blocks might read like this:

        Select two large red blocks and two small green blocks.

        Place one red block on its side.

        Attach one green block to the red block.

. . . and so on. Then present the “parts” and your instructions to team members. Watch as your team tries to assemble the blocks according to your instructions. Assess the instructions for usability. Were all tasks accounted for? Did any terms or language confuse the readers? Would the addition of visuals help? Go back and perform a task analysis, and discuss what you could do to improve the usability of your instruction card.
Global Application

Astronomy and planetary science have become truly global sciences, and space exploration is now conducted by multinational teams. Knowledge about astronomy belongs to everyone, regardless of nationality or language. Do the Web sites representing these disciplines succeed in making themselves accessible to and useful for a global audience?

Explore Web sites such as the Planetary Society, NASA, and the European Space Agency, and assess their usability for international audiences. Would non-English speakers be able to access the information on these sites? What efforts are made to inform and persuade international readers? Are language and cultural differences accounted for in the design, content, and interface?

Draw up a list of key elements and features of each site that contribute to or detract from usability for international audiences. What changes would you recommend to make each site more accessible, usable, and persuasive for non-English readers? Summarize your assessment in a brief memo, including printed copies of specific pages from each Web site that you discuss.
Digital And Social Media Application

Locate a Web site that accommodates various audiences at various levels of technicality. For instance, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is a good source of both general and specialized information, with links for general readers and medical experts alike.

On this or a similar site, locate (a) material aimed at a general audience and (b) material on the same topic aimed at a specialized or expert audience. First, list the features that enabled you to identify each piece’s level of technicality. Next, using the Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet, record assumptions about the audience made by the author of the nontechnical version. See if the agency or organization you selected also has a Facebook page; if so, compare the content on Facebook to what you noted for the Web site, and discuss what audience assumptions seem to be involved in changes in word choice, images, and other features.
