Chapter 4 Recognizing Ethical Issues in Technical Communication
A photo shows a small balance.
Learning Objectives

    4.1 Recognize ethical dilemmas and appreciate that they involve many considerations.

    4.2 Realize how ethics are often compromised by workplace pressures.

    4.3 Avoid various types of ethical abuses.

Chapter Outline

    Ethics, Technology, and Communication

    How Workplace Pressures Affect Ethical Values

    Recognizing and Avoiding Ethical Abuses

        Strategies for Avoiding Ethical Abuses

        Checklist for Ethical Communication

    Applications

Technical communication does not occur in a void. It happens in the world of human beings, politics, and social conditions, a world in which we regularly face ethical dilemmas that balance our sense of what is right against a decision that may be more efficient, profitable, or better for the company.

Ethics, Technology, and Communication

    4.1 Recognize ethical dilemmas and appreciate that they involve many considerations.

Imagine the following scenario: You work for a company that makes apps to help travelers locate restaurants and hotels. Your team of engineers and technical writers decides that linking the app to a smartphone’s maps or GPS would be great for customers. To operate most effectively, however, the app must continue collecting location information in the background, even when the app itself is switched off. Customers could opt out of this feature, but the default setting is for the feature to be on. Your company’s legal department has approved. The team wants customers to keep the setting on so that the app works properly. As a technical communicator, your decision becomes less a legal one than an ethical one about customer privacy. Communication about this app (a press release announcing it or online help via the company Web site) plays a central role in this dilemma. Should you, as the technical writer, include this information where it is easily visible to customers (such as on the first page of the user manual), exclude the information completely, or deemphasize this feature by using a small font?

These are not simple questions. Taking an ethical stance requires a personal decision on your part as to how to weigh your ethical and moral beliefs against the realities of the job. This stance requires you to consider the effects of your decisions on the people who use your product, on your company, on society at large, and on your job. Sometimes standing your ground on an ethical issue may mean losing your job or suffering retaliation from coworkers.
Types of Ethical Choices

Virtually all areas of science and technology are involved in issues of communication and ethics. Here are a few examples:

    Medical technologies, such as genetic testing, raise questions about personal privacy and medical insurance.

    Banking and retail operations, which increasingly collect personal information on consumers, raise concerns about how this information is used and who has access to it.

    Environmental pollutants, such as pesticides or smokestack output, raise serious questions about the long-term health of the planet.

In your own communication, you will often face ethical decisions—about how much information to include, how much to leave out, how to word an issue, or how to shape the information for your audience. Note how the memo from David Michem in Figure 4.1 sounds completely well-reasoned and persuasive. An employee reading the memo, especially one with an existing medical condition, might go straight to the company Web site and sign up for a Medical History Card. But in his desire to make the card program a success, Michem’s memo offers employees no information about confidentiality and privacy. Will the company have access to personal and medical information when employees sign up via the Web site? Will the information be encrypted? Will third parties have access to this information? By omitting this information from the memo, Michem has been misleading, as reasonable as his memo may sound. In the end, communication is never neutral but instead always carries some type of consequence.
Figure 4.1

A document that raises ethical concerns
A figure shows a document that raises ethical concerns.

Note the misleading omission of information about employee confidentiality
Figure 4.1 Full Alternative Text

How Workplace Pressures Affect Ethical Values

    4.2 Realize how ethics are often compromised by workplace pressures.

In the workplace, ethical rules are broken not because people are dishonest but because they feel pressure (about deadlines or sales targets, for example) to bend or break the rules. To save face, escape blame, or get ahead, people often feel obliged to say what other people want to hear or to suppress or downplay bad news. Figure 4.2 depicts how workplace pressures to “succeed at any cost” can influence ethical values.
Figure 4.2

How workplace pressures can influence ethical values
A figure illustrates the way the ethical values of a writer are influenced by workplace pressures.
Figure 4.2 Full Alternative Text

Despite outside pressures, however, it is critical to maintain workplace ethical standards at all times. Unethical decisions can harm a company’s reputation and bottom line. More importantly, unethical decisions can compromise the safety and welfare of workers and customers. When an instruction manual is written and vital safety information is purposely omitted to downplay any safety concerns, for example, people can be injured.


Recognizing and Avoiding Ethical Abuses

    4.3 Avoid various types of ethical abuses.

Following are some of the major examples of unethical communication in the workplace.

    Plagiarizing the work of others. Technical communicators may feel pressure to produce results quickly and thus may be tempted to cut corners. Workplace plagiarism occurs when a person claims the work of someone else as one’s own, without citing or even mentioning the original source. Plagiarism may also happen in collaborative work, as when a team leader claims all the credit for the work of team members.

    Falsifying or fabricating information. Outside pressure to produce results may tempt people to distort information. For example, research data might be manipulated or invented by a scientist seeking grant money; researchers whose studies could benefit human health (for instance, studies about new drugs or medical innovations) might feel pressured to release their findings before the data is verified by peer review or additional testing.

    Suppressing or downplaying information. Withholding information is just as unethical as supplying false information. For example, a report author may purposely fail to mention an important study that contradicts what he or she wants to prove. Or a company may fail to inform the public about a safety hazard in one of its products—or, if the hazard is revealed, may downplay its importance.

    Exaggerating claims. Organizations that have a stake in a particular technology (e.g., bioengineered foods) may be especially tempted to exaggerate its benefits, potential, or safety and to downplay its risks. If your organization depends on outside funding (e.g., the defense or space industry), you might find yourself pressured to make unrealistic promises.

    Using visual images that conceal the truth. Images are generally more powerful than words and can easily be created to distort the real meaning of a message. For example, an individual might create a pie chart that paints a more optimistic picture than the data indicate by distorting the sizes of the pie pieces. Or an online ad for a prescription drug may list drastic side effects while showing images of smiling, healthy people, thus downplaying the dangers. Photo editing software makes it especially easy to manipulate images.

    Stealing or divulging proprietary information. Information that originates in a specific company is typically the exclusive intellectual property of that company. In theory, such information is legally protected, but it remains vulnerable to sabotage, theft, or leaks to the press. Fierce competition among rival companies for the very latest intelligence gives rise to theft or unethical divulging of such information.

    Misusing electronic information. Ever-increasing amounts of personal information are stored in databases (by schools, governments, credit card companies, insurance companies, pharmacies), and all employers, of course, keep data about their employees. How we combine, use, and share all of this electronic information raises questions about privacy. If you are designing a Web site, for example, should you create a page that asks customers for personal information without providing information about how your company intends to use that information? The lack of an easy-to-access privacy policy could be considered an ethical breach.

    Exploiting cultural differences. Both individuals and organizations can exploit the vulnerabilities of various cultural groups through manipulation or deception. For instance, one employee of a company might exploit another’s English-language limitations for personal gain. So too, an organization might exploit clients for whom the culture places greater emphasis on interpersonal trust than on lawyers or legal wording.

To avoid ethical abuses, follow the guidelines provided by professional organizations in your field (e.g., see the American Medical Writers Association Code of Ethics in Figure 4.3), and use the Strategies on page 67.
Figure 4.3

A code of ethics from a professional organization
A figure shows the web page of the code of ethics of American Medical Writers Association.

Source: Courtesy of American Medical Writers Association. Used with permission.
Figure 4.3 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Avoiding Ethical Abuses

    Always cite your sources if the information or data are not your own. For specific advice on avoiding plagiarism and citing outside sources, see Appendix A.

    Give the audience everything it needs to know. Don’t bury readers in needless details, but do make sure they get all the facts, including information about online privacy, data sharing practices, sources of the information you publish, and dates of publication.

    Give people a clear understanding of what the information means. Even when all the facts are known, facts can be misinterpreted. Try to ensure that readers understand the facts clearly. Provide links to other credible sources if you think people need more information. If you are not certain about your own understanding, say so.

    Never manipulate information or data in your writing or in your visuals. If you encounter data that contradict what you want to say, include and interpret those data honestly. Likewise, do not make your case via exaggeration, understatement, sugarcoating, or any other distortion or omission.

    Follow your company’s confidentiality guidelines. If you suspect information may be confidential, assume it is or ask the appropriate personnel to clarify.

    Do not exploit cultural inequalities or manipulate international readers. Try to be fair. When producing a document for an international audience, be especially careful about using simple and honest language and visuals.

    Constantly ask yourself, “Would I stand behind what I have created if I were held publicly accountable for it?” If you would not, then chances are what you have written is unethical to some degree. It may be not entirely honest, fair, confidential, or safe.

    Consult the ethical guidelines for your profession. Every profession, from the law to medicine to technical writing to engineering, has a professional society and a set of guidelines for ethical behavior. Figure 4.3 presents just one example.

Checklist
for Ethical Communication

Use this checklist for any document you prepare or for which you are responsible.

    Are the statements in this document fair, accurate, and clear?

    Will the document be reviewed by the company or organization’s legal department?

    Am I familiar with my company or organization’s ethics and privacy standards?

    Have I researched and reviewed the ethical guidelines for the profession or subject matter area (health, medicine, engineering, banking, manufacturing, other)?

    Have I avoided exaggerating, distorting, or leaving out any important information?

    Do I have a clear understanding of the audience for this document (see Chapter 2)?

    Am I creating a document that represents what these readers need to know or do?

    Have I conducted enough research (see Chapter 3) to ensure that the document is fact-based and presents a range of perspectives?

    Have I informed readers about safety and other precautions related to this product or service?

    Have I avoided plagiarizing or taking credit for the work of others?

    Has anyone on the team felt pressure to fabricate or falsify information?

    Do the document’s visuals convey information in a truthful way, avoiding any sort of distortions?

    Have I considered the digital and social media outlets where this document might be published and looked into those sites’ privacy policies?

    Does the document provide contact information (Facebook page, Web site, toll free phone number), in case readers have questions or want more information?

Applications
General Application

Do an online search to locate the professional code of ethics for your major or career. Divide into groups of three or four students, each of whom has a different major. Compare your professional codes, noting similarities and differences. Discuss why each code seems appropriate for that profession. Discuss any recent ethical situations or cases you know about and review how the professional code of ethics may not have been adequate enough to address these situations.
Team Application

In groups of two or three, locate a piece of technical communication (such as an online user manual or a Web site about vaccines or a study about climate change) and evaluate the document’s ethical stance. Is the information presented in such a way that ideas or facts are exaggerated or suppressed? Are any cultural issues exploited? Share your thoughts in class, and explain how your team would revise, rewrite, and redesign the information.
Global Application

Counterfeiting, sometimes known as “intellectual property piracy,” has become a major point of tension between the United States and many developing nations. Counterfeit products ranging from consumer products (such as high fashion purses and jeans) to cigarettes to cell phones can be found in markets across the globe.

Use the Internet to do some preliminary reading about the problems of counterfeit products. What are the advantages and disadvantages, both economically and politically, of trying to crack down on unauthorized copycat products? Why do some countries do little to police such piracy while others, including the United States, view it as a major priority?

Write a brief report analyzing the ethical issues involved and how these issues influence economic and political settings. Present your findings in a brief oral presentation to your class.
Digital and Social Media Application

Social media creates ethical challenges for the workplace. For example, people use Facebook to post about personal activities and assume this information is only viewable by friends. But during a job interview, a person may be surprised to discover that a posting intended for friends was also discovered by the potential employer. Should the employer have looked at a person’s social media postings? Also, the use of content from Twitter or blogs as the basis for workplace decisions could result in unintended consequences if that information turns out to be inaccurate.

Do an online search on “ethics and social media.” Select two or three articles or sources from credible sites about workplace communication (for instance, LinkedIn has lots of great articles about how to use social media effectively in the job market). Meet with two other students in class and share your findings. Give a brief presentation in class describing the main points made in these sources.
