Chapter 8 Designing User-Friendly Documents
A photo shows an overhead view of a man looking at a computer screen on a table strewn with papers.
Learning Objectives

    8.1 Understand the importance of document design.

    8.2 Appreciate the role of accessibility, cohesiveness, hierarchy, and inclusiveness in document design.

    8.3 Use design elements for consistency, coherence, navigation, and emphasis.

Chapter Outline

    The Importance of User-Friendly Document Design 

    Characteristics of Well-Designed Documents 

    Specific Design Elements 

        Strategies for Designing: Consistency and Cohesiveness 

        Strategies for Designing: Navigation and Emphasis 

        Checklist for Document Design 

    Applications

Design, the layout of words and graphics, determines the look of a document. Whether hard copy or digital, well-designed pages invite readers in, guide them through the material, and help them understand and remember the information.

This chapter provides principles and guidelines that are generally applicable across many media types (print, digital). See Chapter 19 for more on blogs, wikis, and Web pages.

The Importance of User-Friendly Document Design

    8.1 Understand the importance of document design.

Like all decisions about technical communication, document design consists of a ­series of informed choices. You need to decide about fonts, typography, white space, and other visual elements, based on the document’s audience and purpose. These ­decisions affect the usability of the document.

Imagine you are asked to produce a heart surgery brochure for a hospital. The ­brochure’s intended audience consists of patients who have a particular heart condition and may need to undergo a specific type of heart surgery. The brochure’s purpose is to explain the procedure, answer frequently asked questions, and review the risks—while reassuring patients.

Before you would even begin to think about what to write or how to design the document, you would need to do an audience and purpose analysis (see Chapter 3). If the brochure also needed to include a list of tasks, such as a checklist of actions patients must take, you might also conduct a task analysis (explained in Chapter 3). Your analysis would yield much important information. For example, you are likely to determine the following as the most important outcomes for the document:

    To reassure fearful patients that the surgery is safe and that the recovery rate is quicker than that of many other types of heart surgery.

    To ensure that readers are able to understand what they need to do before, during, and after the surgery.

    To make certain that older patients—who make up the largest population of candidates for this surgery and who sometimes have poor eyesight—are able to read the document.

To reassure fearful patients, you could choose a comforting typeface, a warm color scheme, and plenty of white space to give the brochure an unimposing look. To ensure that patients understand the steps involved, you could use numbered and bulleted lists to break up and simplify the various procedures. To make the document more readable for older patients, you could use a large font size. To make the document accessible to as many readers as possible, you could design print copies for a doctor’s waiting room and a PDF version for the Web site.

Document design, like all aspects of technical communication, puts audience and purpose first.

Characteristics of Well-Designed Documents

    8.2 Appreciate the role of accessibility, cohesiveness, hierarchy, and inclusiveness in document design.

Readers appreciate documents that are well designed because such documents make it easy and pleasant for people to access and use the information they need. Well-designed documents typically have four characteristics: they are inviting and ­accessible; they flow well as a single, cohesive unit; they provide a visual hierarchy, displaying information in the right order; and they address a diversity of readers. Figure 8.1 does not meet those requirements, while Figure 8.2 (a revision of the same document) does.
Figure 8.1

Ineffective page design
A figure shows an ineffective page design.
Figure 8.1 Full Alternative Text
Figure 8.2

Effective redesign of Figure 8.1
A figure shows an effective redesign.

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Figure 8.2 Full Alternative Text

People generally read technical documents only because they have to. They may pick up a document because they need information, as in the heart surgery brochure described above, or they may be presented with a document they are required to read for work. Either way, readers will resist a document that is intimidating or hard to read and will try to get the information in some other way (e.g., going online to find a more straightforward presentation or asking a colleague or the writer for clarification).

Word processing, page layout, and other apps can help you with document ­design, but all the software in the world won’t make a difference unless you first understand the basic principles of visual appeal and accessibility.

Notice how Figure 8.1 presents a barrage of information with absolutely no design elements, making the information needlessly intimidating, unappealing, and hard to grasp. In contrast, Figure 8.2 uses a clear title, margins, white space, bullets, headings, and color to present the same information in a much more open, inviting, and accessible manner.

Generally, readers view a document first as a whole unit, scanning the page quickly to get a sense of the overall layout. Even from a distance, without being able to read the text, readers should be able to answer the question “How is this document structured?” Design elements help readers answer that question.

Consider how Figure 8.1 tells readers nothing about how the document works as a unit—it is simply a page full of text. Figure 8.2, on the other hand, has a purpose (as indicated by a title), moves from point A to point B (as indicated by the headings), and presents a list of specific facts (as indicated by the bullets).

Readers also expect the document to highlight the most important information. In other words, they expect the document’s design to help them determine the visual hierarchy of the information, displayed primarily through the level and design of the headings and the inclusion of numbered or bulleted lists.

Notice how Figure 8.1 provides no visual hierarchy. It simply offers a series of paragraphs, each seemingly offering information of equal importance. In contrast, Figure 8.2 offers a clear hierarchy of information. All three headed sections are of equal importance, and so the headers are designed identically (same font, font size, and color). The bulleted items fall into two levels of detail: general and specific (the more specific bulleted items are indented further in a different style of bullet).

A document’s design can also affect its multicultural appeal. For instance, a ­certain color might be interpreted differently by different readers. As a rule, use subtle and varied colors, standard fonts and font sizes, and appropriate white space.

Specific Design Elements

    8.3 Use design elements for consistency, coherence, navigation, and emphasis.

The elements of document design comprise two categories: those that give a document a consistent and cohesive look and those that aid navigation and add emphasis. No design elements should be merely decorative; all should enhance the reader’s orientation and understanding.
Designing for Consistency and Cohesiveness

Elements that provide consistency and cohesiveness include grid patterns, margins, paragraphs, justification, white space, line spacing and indentation, font style, and font size. Each element is described below and summarized in the Strategies on pages 131–132.
Grid Patterns

Grid patterns help readers make sense of a document as a single unit because they create an underlying structure throughout the document. Figure 8.3 shows a sampling of grid patterns. Most documents follow a standard horizontal grid pattern, as, for example, a memo or letter. A vertical grid is commonly used in manuals, brochures, or newsletters. In rare cases, you may want to use a combined grid pattern. Word processing and page layout software let you choose from templates that offer different combinations of grid patterns, appropriate for different formats (brochure versus newsletter, for example).
Figure 8.3

Grid patterns
A figure illustrates different grid patterns.
Figure 8.3 Full Alternative Text
Margins

Consistent margins give the document a unified appearance. Margins must not only be the same width throughout a document but also wide enough. Narrow margins crowd the page and make the material look harder than it probably is. On your 8½-by-11-inch page, provide margins of at least 1 or 1½ inches on each side, as well as at the top and bottom, of every page. If the manuscript is to be bound in a cover, increase the left (inside) margin to 2 inches.
Paragraphs

Whereas ordering information within paragraphs (as discussed in Chapter 5) affects a document’s overall structure, the shape of each paragraph serves a design function. Use a long paragraph (but try to keep it to 15 lines or less) for clustering material that is closely related or best understood in one block; use short paragraphs for making complex material more digestible (as in step-by-step instructions or for emphasizing vital information). At the same time, try to vary the lengths of your paragraphs. Readers are likely to resist a document that consists primarily of long or short paragraphs only. Also, avoid “orphans” (one line of a paragraph at the bottom of a page) and “widows” (one line of a paragraph at the top of a page).
Justification

Text is always automatically flush left (lined up evenly along the left margin). However, along the right margin, you have a choice between justified text (even right margins) or unjustified text (uneven or “ragged” right margins). Each ­arrangement creates its own feel.

In justified text, blocks of text look clean and even on either side, but spacing varies between words and letters on a line, and you may need to frequently hyphenate words. Justified text is generally used in books, annual reports, and other formal ­materials. In unjustified text, text is ragged on the right side of text blocks, but spacing between words and letters on a line is even, and you can avoid overuse of hyphenation. Unjustified text is appropriate for more personal forms of communication, such as letters, memos, and in-house reports. Whichever justification you choose, be consistent throughout the document. Figure 8.4 illustrates justified and unjustified text.
Figure 8.4

Justified and unjustified text
A figure shows justified and unjustified text.
Figure 8.4 Full Alternative Text
White Space

Sometimes, it’s what’s not on the page that makes a difference. Whereas margins are the empty spaces along the left, right, top, and bottom of a document, white space is any empty space surrounding figures and tables, between columns, and between paragraphs. Areas of text or visuals surrounded by appropriate white space draw the reader’s eye to those areas. Well-designed white space is used evenly throughout an entire document, orienting readers by keeping related elementstogether, isolating and emphasizing important elements, and providing breathing room between blocks of information, as in Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.5

White space
A figure illustrates white space.
Figure 8.5 Full Alternative Text
Line Spacing and Indentation

Always be consistent about line spacing. In most technical documents, use double spacing for ease of reading. When inserting a long quotation, indent the quotation, use single spacing within the quotation only, then return to double spacing for regular text. Also, be consistent about indentation. As a general rule, indent each paragraph unless you insert an extra line space between paragraphs.
Font Style

Font style refers to the typeface used and the personality that each typeface conveys. Fonts fall into several categories: Serif fonts (such as Times New Roman and Palatino) include serifs, or fine lines that extend horizontally from the main strokes of a letter. Serif fonts are generally considered more formal. Sans serif fonts (such as Helvetica and Arial) do not include these fine lines (“sans” is French for “without”). They tend to look professional without being quite as formal as serif fonts and are appropriate for most other types of technical documents. Decorative fonts are often used in advertising and marketing but should be avoided in technical documents. Figure 8.6 shows the differences between these font styles. Pick an appropriate font and stick with it throughout a document. For headings, you might select a different font (and a larger size); be sure to use those heading fonts consistently.
Figure 8.6

Sample font styles
A figure shows sample font styles.
Figure 8.6 Full Alternative Text

Italics, boldface, and ALL CAPS are another element of font style you need to consider. Sometimes, people use italics much as they would use a highlighter or marker to set words apart and draw attention to these words. But excessive use of italics can make it hard for your audience to decide which information is truly important. The same is true for boldface: too much bold will lose its appeal. Bold is good for headings, subheadings, or terms or concepts that you want to emphasize in a sentence. Within text, use bold selectively. Use all capital letters for a few words only or when creating short headings. Long strings of capital (uppercase) letters and words are hard to read.
Font Size

Use font sizes that are easy to read. Standard guidelines suggest using between a 10-point and 12-point font size for the text of most documents (usually erring to the side of 12-point). Use a 2-point larger font for each level of headings (see page 132). Most important, be consistent throughout the document.
Strategies
for Designing: Consistency and Cohesiveness
Grid Patterns

    Select an appropriate grid pattern. Use a horizontal grid pattern for most basic documents (memos, ­letters, reports). Use a vertical grid pattern for specialized documents (manuals, brochures, and newsletters). Use a combined pattern rarely.

    Use the same grid pattern throughout the document.

Margins

    Use adequate margins. Use a 1-inch to 1½-inch margin along the top, bottom, left, and right of the page. For bound documents, use a 2-inch inside margin.

    Use the same margins throughout the document.

Paragraphs

    Vary the length of paragraphs. Use long and short paragraphs as appropriate to keep blocks of related text together.

    Avoid orphans and widows. Add extra space to bump orphans to the next page, and reduce space (or shorten paragraph content) to pull widows to the previous page.

Justification

    Determine if your text will be justified on one or both margins. Use justified left and right for formal documents, and use left-only justified (ragged right margin) for less formal documents (memos, letters, in-house reports, and so on).

    Use the same justification throughout the document.

White Space

    Use plenty of white space. Use white space between paragraphs and/or columns and around visuals, when appropriate.

    Use white space consistently. If you include white space between paragraphs or columns, use the same amount throughout the document. Include the same amount of white space around each visual in the document.

Line Spacing and Indentation

    Decide how you want to use line spacing and indentation. Use single, double, or other (for instance, 1½) line spacing. Indent all paragraphs or none.

    Stick with your original plan. Don’t vary the line spacing or paragraph indentation. Be consistent.

Font Style

    Use either a serif or sans serif font. Use a serif font for formal reports and a sans serif font for most other documents.

    Decide which serif or sans serif font to use. Some of the most popular serif fonts are Times New Roman and Times. The most popular sans serif font is Helvetica.

    Stay with the same font throughout. You might choose a different font for any headings in your ­document.

    Use italics, boldface, and ALL CAPS selectively and sparingly.

Font Size

    Use a standard font size. Generally, a 10-point to 12-point size (depending on the font style) should be used for text and a slightly larger size for each level of heading.

    Use a consistent font size. Stay with the font size you’ve chosen for each element (text, headings, notes) throughout the document.

Designing for Navigation and Emphasis

Elements that aid navigation and add emphasis include headings; color, shading, boldface, italics, and underlining; bulleted and numbered lists; running heads and footers; and tables of contents and indexes.
Headings

Headings not only help chunk information into easily digestible parts (structure, see Chapter 5) but also guide readers through a page and signal the relative importance of topics. Readers often will move back and forth in a document, searching for the sections that seem most relevant, or they will scan only the main headings, skipping the lower-level headings. To help readers navigate, design your headings consistently.

Headings generally break down into A-level (major headings), B-level (secondary headings, which always fall beneath A-level headings), and C-level (minor headings, which always fall beneath B-level headings). Each higher level of heading should encompass at least two heads at the next lower level. Lower levels of headings (D-level, etc.) make a document appear hard to navigate. Use bulleted or numbered lists instead.

Always use the same font style, size, and color at each level. Avoid orphans (headings that stand alone at the bottom of a page without any text beneath them). Notice how the headings are set up in Figure 8.2 (page 127). The A-level heading (“Mold”) uses a bold font, larger than the other fonts. B-level heads are in all caps and boldface and italics, set above each paragraph. Instead of using headings, C-level entries use bullets and are indented. These C-level entries could also be set up as actual headings by creating a short title for each and using boldface along with the bullets and indentations.
Color, Shading, Boldface, Italics, and Underlining

Color can help readers move through the text and can draw attention to particular areas. For example, you can use color for headings, tabs, sidebars, callouts (labels that identify parts of a figure), and leader lines (dotted, dashed, or solid lines that connect labels with their objects), as in Figure 8.7. To highlight important information, you can use color for screens, horizontal and vertical rules, type, cross-references, and ruled boxes, as in Figure 8.8.
Figure 8.7

Using color for navigation
A figure illustrates the use of color for navigation.
Figure 8.7 Full Alternative Text
Figure 8.8

Using color for emphasis
A figure illustrates the use of color for emphasis.
Figure 8.8 Full Alternative Text

Use color sparingly and use colors that aren’t overly bright, that don’t obscure the text they cover, and that contrast well with black print. You may also use shading, bold, italics, or underlining.
Bulleted and Numbered Lists

Whenever you include a series of similar or step-by-step items within a sentence or paragraph, consider using a bulleted or numbered list. Bulleted and numbered lists help readers navigate through dense information and emphasize the information by separating it from the text. However, don’t overuse; don’t use fancy icons when a plain round dot will do; and don’t confuse the functions of bulleted and numbered lists. Bullets separate and highlight equally weighted items. Numbers enumerate the fixed sequence of steps in a process. Figure 8.9 compares in-text lists to bulleted and numbered lists. (For more on using lists, see Appendix B.)
Figure 8.9

Bulleted versus numbered lists
A figure illustrates bulleted versus numbered lists.
Figure 8.9 Full Alternative Text
Running Headers and Footers

Running heads and footers in longer ­printed documents help readers find material. They also help readers stay oriented to their location in the document. Typically, a running head includes section- or chapter-specific information (as in this book) and running footers are reserved for book titles. However, page numbers may be included either in a running head or footer. In a document with single-sided pages, running heads or footers should be placed consistently, typically flush right. In a document with double-sided pages, the ­running heads or footers should appear flush left on left-hand pages and flush right on right-hand pages, as in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10

Running heads and footers
A figure illustrates running heads and footers.
Figure 8.10 Full Alternative Text
Tables of Contents and Indexes

In a longer document, a table of contents and an index help readers find the information they need. In addition, the table of contents signals the relationship between topics and subtopics. Make sure your table of contents matches the heading structure of your document exactly.

Most of us have had the frustrating experience of trying to look something up in an index and discovering that the term we use is not the term the index uses. A successful index depends on knowing what categories, terms, and topics your readers are likely to look up when searching for what they need. For longer, more complex documents, consider hiring a professional indexer.
Strategies
for Designing: Navigation and Emphasis
Headings

    Design headings consistently. Always use the same font style, size, and color for the same level of ­headings. A-level headings are typically in all caps, boldface, and rest above paragraphs; B-level headings are usually in initial caps, boldface, and rest above paragraphs; and C-level heads are typically in initial caps, boldface, and run into paragraphs (whether or not the paragraphs are indented).

    Divide headings logically. Make each higher level head yield at least two heads at the next level. B-level headings always fall within A-level headed sections, and C-level headings always fall within B-level headed sections.

    Avoid excessive headings. Try to avoid D-level headings and never move to a level beyond that.

    Avoid orphans. If a heading stands alone at the bottom of a page, without at least two lines of text ­beneath, add more space to bump the heading to the next page.

Color, Shading, Boldface, Italics, and Underlining

    Use color as needed. Use color headings, tabs, sidebars, callouts, and leader lines (page 133) for navigation. Use color screens, horizontal/vertical rules, type, cross references, and ruled boxes for emphasis.

    Use color sparingly. Color should not overpower the document and should complement, not obstruct, the text.

    Use shading, bold, italics, and underlining. If color is unavailable or you prefer to aid navigation and provide emphasis in other ways, use these design options.

Bulleted and Numbered Lists

    Use bulleted and numbered lists appropriately. Bulleted lists show a series of similar items, while numbered lists show a sequence of step-by-step items.

    Don’t overuse lists. Otherwise, your document might look like a shopping list.

Running Heads and Footers

    Decide if running footers are necessary. Usually, running footers are used only for full-length books, though you may use them in documents to place page numbers.

    Always include page numbers. Whether you put them in running heads or running footers, page numbers are essential. For a long document, count your title page as page i, without numbering it, and number all front matter pages, including the table of contents and abstract, with lowercase roman numerals (ii, iii, iv). Number the first and subsequent text pages with Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3, and so on).

    Include section- or chapter-specific information in running heads.

    Format running heads and footers correctly. See Figure 8.10.

Tables of Contents and Indexes

    Use tables of contents and indexes for longer documents.

    Make sure tables of contents match document headers exactly.

    Use standard index categories and topics. Try to accurately anticipate which terms readers will look up in searching for what they need.

Checklist
for Document Design
Consistency and Cohesiveness

    Does my grid structure provide a consistent visual theme?

    Are margins ample?

    Is each paragraph tailored to suit its purpose?

    Is the document’s right margin unjustified?

    Does the white space create areas of emphasis?

    Is the document’s line spacing and indentation effective?

    Have I chosen readable and appropriate font sizes and styles?

    In general, have I used versions of a single typeface throughout?

    If different typefaces are used, are they used consistently?

    Have I used italics, boldface, and ALL CAPS sparingly?

Navigation and Emphasis

    Do headings clearly announce the document’s large and small segments?

    Are headings sized to reflect their specific level in the document?

    Are headings visually consistent and grammatically parallel?

    Have I formatted a series of parallel items as a list (numbered or bulleted, as appropriate)?

    Do running headers and footers announce sections of the document?

    Have I used page numbers appropriately?

    Are the table of contents and the index complete and easy to navigate?

Applications
General Application

With a partner, find two printed documents: one that demonstrates good use of design elements and another that demonstrates confusing or inconsistent use. Imagine you and your partner are a team of technical communication consultants. Write a memo to the manager of the organization that produced the effective document, explaining its positive features. Write a memo to the manager of the organization that produced the confusing document, making suggestions for improvement.
Team Application

Working in teams of three or four people, find a document (print or online) intended to answer a question—a patient brochure about an illness or medical procedure, a reference guide for new students on campus, or a personnel document from your company, for example. Your team’s goal is to redesign the document so that it uses an appropriate grid design; makes effective use of white space; and uses formatting, fonts, headings, and other page design elements consistently and clearly.

Appoint one member of your group to serve as editor. The editor is responsible for making sure the design elements are used consistently throughout the redesigned document. Ask each team member to work on one section of the document. Assemble all the redesigned sections, and ask your editor to review the materials. The editor should check your work against the Checklist for Document Design.
Global Application

Find a document that presents the same information in several languages (assembly instructions for various products are often written in two or three languages, for example). Evaluate the design decisions made in these documents. For example, are the different languages presented side by side or in different sections? Write a memo to classmates and your instructor evaluating the document and making recommendations for improvement.
Digital and Social Media Application

Technical documents are often created using templates, which are readily available in word processing and page design programs. Templates allow you to create sophisticated, attractive documents quickly and easily. But this ease of use can restrict your options to change or customize a design for a specific audience and purpose. In groups of two, consider the heart surgery brochure described on the first page of this chapter. Find a few brochure templates, either in Microsoft Word, Google docs, or the Adobe Digital Publishing Suite, and ­compare your findings to the design principles presented in the Strategies boxes (pages 131–132 and 136–137). What are the pros and cons of using a template for this situation? How much are you able to manipulate the template’s settings? For example, can you change an all caps heading to upper- and lowercase? Can you change the colors? Which programs are easier to use, and can you find any online tutorials to learn more?
