Chapter 9 Résumés and Other Employment Materials
A photo shows a woman filling out an application form.
Learning Objectives

    9.1 Focus on what you can offer an employer.

    9.2 Research jobs and narrow your job search.

    9.3 Create an effective reverse chronological or functional résumé.

    9.4 Write a persuasive solicited or unsolicited job application letter.

    9.5 Submit appropriate digital job application materials.

    9.6 Compile a dossier, portfolio, or e-portfolio.

    9.7 Prepare for job interviews and write professional follow-up communication.

Chapter Outline

    Assessing Your Skills and Aptitudes 

    Researching the Job Market 

    Résumés 

        Strategies for Creating a Résumé

    Application Letters 

        Strategies for Application Letters

    Digital versus Print Job Application Materials 

        Strategies for Digital Job Application Materials

    Dossiers, Portfolios, and E-portfolios 

        Strategies for Dossiers, Portfolios, and E-portfolios

    Interviews and Follow-up Letters 

        Strategies for Interviews and Follow-up Notes

        Checklist for Résumés

        Checklist for Job Application Letters

        Checklist for Supporting Materials

    Applications 

This chapter highlights the importance of using the skills you have learned thus far and encourages you to create a portfolio of sample documents that will help you on the job market.

Enhance your job search by relying on key principles from earlier chapters. For example, research each specific position for which you apply (see Chapter 2). Show that you communicate persuasively, present yourself honestly, and understand teamwork (see Chapters 1, 3, and 4). Also, prepare all application materials with a clear sense of audience and purpose (see Chapter 3).

In today’s job market, there is strong competition for jobs at all levels. Whether you are applying for your first professional job or changing careers, you need to market your skills effectively. At each stage of the job search, you must stand out among the competition.

Assessing Your Skills and Aptitudes

    9.1 Focus on what you can offer an employer.

Begin your job search by assessing the qualities and skills you can offer a potential employer:

    Do I communicate well, and am I a good listener?

    Do I work well in groups and with people from different backgrounds?

    Do I have experience or aptitude for a leadership role?

    Can I solve problems and get things done?

    Can I perform well under pressure?

    Can I work independently, with minimal supervision?

    Do I have any special skills (public speaking, working with people, technical skills, aptitude with writing and editing, analytical skills, second or third languages, artistic/musical talent, mathematical aptitude)?

    Do I have any hobbies that could improve my job prospects?

    Would I prefer to work at a large company or a small one? At a for-profit or a nonprofit organization?

    Do I like to travel, or would I prefer working in a single location?

Besides helping to focus your job search, your answers to these questions will come in handy when you write your résumé and prepare for job interviews.

Researching the Job Market

    9.2 Research jobs and narrow your job search.

Narrowing your search does not mean limiting yourself to one or two types of job, but instead giving yourself a measure of realistic focus. Try to stick to those fields that interest you most and fit you best.

Begin your research well in advance of the time you need to have a job lined up. If you’ve never done job research, the question “Where do I start?” can be daunting. More than ever, seemingly endless sources of information are available to job seekers. Try to proceed in a step-by-step, logical way, as described below, rather than immediately going online and trying to navigate random Web sites.

Before you apply for specific jobs, learn more about the industry or area where you’d like to work. Consult reference materials (such as books, magazines, and Web sites) that provide background information about working in this field. Join a professional group related to your industry, study the information on its Web site, and attend local meetings where you can speak with people already working in this area. (Note that many professional societies offer reduced membership rates for students.) Learn about the key companies in your industry of choice—find out who they are, make a list, and research those particular companies. Finally, set up an informational interview with someone at a company in this field. Even busy professionals are usually willing to speak with students who want to learn more about a particular company or area of employment. These professionals can offer general advice about the industry as a whole and about their own company.
Engage in Active Networking

Once you’ve narrowed down your job search, go to your campus job placement office and meet with a career counselor. Ask about any upcoming on-campus job fairs, alumni networks, résumé workshops, and other campus resources. Go to the library and speak with a reference librarian who can point you to helpful library resources, too. Contact acquaintances and colleagues who may know someone else you can contact.

In addition, use online networking to your advantage. Set up a LinkedIn account and begin going through your contact list to connect with everyone you know who might be of assistance in the job search. Look for communities of interest related to your field, see what jobs are available in your preferred field and location, search for people you know and connect with them, then see what other connections LinkedIn might recommend. In certain fields, such as engineering, science, and management, you might also look for ways to connect to a recruiter on LinkedIn. Remember that the human connection, both in person and facilitated by LinkedIn and similar sites, is a very powerful way to find a job.

Job postings can be located in a variety of places. Use LinkedIn and other sites such as Monster.com, Careerbuilder.com, and the Riley Guide to find jobs across the country or specific to your location; consult the Help Wanted sections of your local newspapers; locate industry-specific jobs on professional organization Web sites; or find jobs advertised only on human resources Web sites of particular companies. You don’t have to limit your search options to advertised jobs, however. Another approach is to send an unsolicited application letter to a company that interests you (for more on unsolicited application letters, see page 150).

Résumés

    9.3 Create an effective reverse chronological or functional résumé.

Before applying for any job, you should create an effective résumé. A résumé is essentially an applicant’s personal advertisement for employment. It lists (in a standard format) education and employment history, along with other relevant information, providing a snapshot of the person’s qualifications.

A résumé is designed to give an employer an instant overview. In fact, employers initially spend only 15 to 45 seconds looking at a résumé; during this scan, they are looking for a persuasive answer to the bottom-line question: “What can you do for us?”

Employers are impressed by a résumé that looks good, reads easily, appears honest, and provides only the relevant information an employer needs to determine if the applicant should be interviewed. Résumés that are mechanically flawed, cluttered, sketchy, hard to follow, or seemingly dishonest simply get discarded.
Parts of a Résumé

All résumés contain standard parts. Every résumé must include contact information, career objectives, education, work experience, and references. A résumé is not the place to include such items as your desired salary and benefits or your requirements for time off. In addition, do not include irrelevant personal information, your photograph, or information that employers are not allowed to legally ask (such as your race, age, or marital status). As you read through this section, refer to Figure 9.1, which includes all the typically required parts.
Figure 9.1

Standard Résumé
A figure shows a standard résumé along with marginal comments on various aspects of the résumé.
Figure 9.1 Full Alternative Text
Contact Information

Tell prospective employers where they can reach you. If you are between addresses, use the address where your mail is being delivered. Be especially sure that your email address and phone number are accurate. For your phone’s voice mail, record a message that is both friendly and professional. If you have a LinkedIn page, include the Web address for your profile page. Remember: Employers may be able to view your Facebook or other social networking pages, so keep those sites professional in tone and content.
Career Objectives

Spell out the job you want. Avoid vague statements such as “A position in which I can apply my education and experience.” Instead, be specific: “An intensive-care nursing position in a teaching hospital, with the eventual goal of supervising and instructing.” Tailor your career objective statement as you apply for different jobs, in order to match yourself with each position.
Education

Begin with your most recent schooling and work backward. Include the name of the school, degree completed, year completed, and your major and minor. Omit high school, unless the high school’s prestige or your achievements there warrant its inclusion. List courses that have directly prepared you for the job you seek. If your class rank or grade point average is favorable, list it. Include specialized training during military service. If you finance your education by working, say so, indicating the percentage of your contribution.
Work Experience

If your experience relates to the job, list it before your education. List the most recent job and then earlier jobs. Include employers’ names and dates of employment. Indicate whether a job was full-time, part-time (hours weekly), or seasonal. Describe your exact duties for each job, indicating promotions. If it is to your advantage, state why you left each job. Include military experience and relevant volunteer work. If you lack paid experience, emphasize your education, including internships and special projects.
Leadership or Other Activities

By law, you are not required to include a photograph or reveal your sex, religion, race, age, national origin, disability, or marital status. List any awards, skills, activities, and interests that are relevant to the given position (e.g., memberships, demonstrations of leadership, languages, and special skills that may be of interest to the employer).
References

If the employer has requested references, list three to five people who have agreed to provide strong assessments of your qualifications and who can speak on your behalf. Never list as references people who haven’t first given you express permission. Your references should not be family members or non-work-related friends; instead, list former employers, professors, and community figures who know you well. If the employer does not request references as part of the initial application, simply state at the end of your résumé: “References available upon request.” If you don’t list references, prepare a separate reference sheet that you can provide on request. Include each person’s job title, company address, and contact information.
Organizing Your Résumé

Organize your résumé to convey the strongest impression of your qualifications, skills, and experience. A standard résumé, like the one in Figure 9.1, is also known as a reverse chronological résumé, listing the most recent school and job first. If you have limited experience or education or gaps in your work history (e.g., due to illness, raising children) or if you have frequently switched career paths, create a functional résumé (Figure 9.2) to highlight skills relevant to a particular job.
Figure 9.2

Functional Résumé
A figure shows a functional résumé along with marginal comments on various aspects of the résumé.
Figure 9.2 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Creating a Résumé

    Begin your résumé well before your job search.

    Tailor your résumé for each job. Read the advertised job requirements, and adjust your career objective accordingly. Tailor your work experience, personal data, and personal interests to emphasize certain areas for certain jobs. Follow the instructions given on the job application or site.

    Try to limit your entry-level résumé to a single page. For entry-level employees, the single page résumé is standard and will help employers get a quick but complete feel for your potential. Experienced professionals will usually have a résumé that fits on two pages.

    Stick to experience relevant to the job. Don’t list everything you’ve ever done.

    Use action verbs and key words. Action verbs (supervised, developed, built, taught, installed, managed, trained, solved, planned, directed) stress your ability to produce results. If your résumé is likely to be scanned electronically or if you post it online, list keywords as nouns (leadership skills, software development, data processing, editing) below your contact information and your statement of objective (see Figure 9.4).

    Use bold, italic, underlining, colors, fonts, bullets, and other devices thoughtfully, for emphasis. Do not use these features to be artsy.

    Never invent or distort credentials. Make yourself look as good as the facts allow. Companies routinely investigate claims made in résumés, and people who lie will certainly not be hired.

    Proofread, proofread, proofread. Don’t rely on autocorrect or spell check alone. Infamous résumé mistakes include winning a “bogus award” instead of a “bonus award” and “ruining” rather than “running” a business.
    
Application Letters

    9.4 Write a persuasive solicited or unsolicited job application letter.

An application letter, also known as a cover letter, complements your résumé when you apply for a job. The letter’s main purpose is to explain how your credentials fit the particular job and to convey a sufficiently informed, professional, and likable persona for the prospective employer to decide that you should be interviewed. Another purpose of the letter is to highlight specific qualifications or skills; for example, you might have listed “Java programming” on your résumé, but for one particular job application, you may wish to call attention to this item in your cover letter:

    My résumé notes that I am experienced with Java programming. In fact, I also tutor Java programming students in our school’s learning center.

Sometimes, you will apply for positions advertised in print or by word of mouth or where you have been invited to apply (for example, by a recruiter who visits your campus) (solicited applications). At other times, you will write prospecting letters to organizations that have not advertised an opening but that might need someone like you (unsolicited applications). In either case, tailor your letter to the situation.
Solicited Application Letters

An application letter—whether solicited or unsolicited—consists of an introduction, body, and conclusion as in Figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3

Solicited Application Letter
A figure shows a solicited application letter along with marginal comments on various aspects of the letter.
Figure 9.3 Full Alternative Text

In your brief introduction (generally, five lines or fewer), do these things: Name the job you’re applying for and where you have seen it advertised; identify yourself and your background; and, if possible, establish a connection by naming the person who encouraged you to apply—but only if that person has given you permission.

Use the body of your letter to detail your case. Without merely repeating your résumé, relate your qualifications specifically to this job. Be specific. Instead of referring to “much experience” or “increased sales,” state that you have “three years of experience” or that you helped create “a 35 percent increase in sales between June and October 2013.” Support all claims with evidence. Instead of saying, “I have leadership skills,” say, “I served as student senate president during my senior year and was captain of the lacrosse team.”

In the conclusion, restate your interest and emphasize your willingness to retrain or relocate if necessary. If the job is nearby, request an interview; otherwise, request a phone call, suggesting a time you can be reached.
Unsolicited Application Letters

Do not limit your job search to advertised openings. In fact, only between 20 and 30 percent of all job openings are advertised. Unsolicited application letters are a good way to uncover possibilities. They do have drawbacks, however: You may waste time writing to organizations that have no openings, and you cannot tailor your letter to advertised requirements. But there are also advantages: Even employers with no openings often welcome and file impressive unsolicited applications or pass them on to another employer who has an opening.

Because an unsolicited letter arrives unexpectedly, you need to get the reader’s immediate attention. Don’t begin, “I am writing to inquire about the possibility of obtaining a position with your company.” Instead, open forcefully by establishing a connection with a mutual acquaintance or by making a strong statement or asking a persuasive question as in the following example:

    Does your hotel chain have a place for a junior manager with a college degree in hospitality management, a proven commitment to quality service, and customer relations experience that extends far beyond textbooks? If so, please consider my application for a position.

Address your letter to the person most likely in charge of hiring. Consult company Web sites for names of company officers. Then call the company to verify the person’s name and title.
Strategies
for Application Letters

    Use caution when adapting sample application letters. Plenty of free, online sample letters can provide ideas for your own situation. But never borrow them whole. Most employers can spot a “canned” letter immediately.

    Create a dynamic tone with active voice. Instead of saying, “More and more management responsibilities were steadily given to me,” say, “I steadily assumed ever-greater management responsibilities.”

    Never be vague. Paint a clear picture for employers who may not be familiar with what you describe. Instead of saying, “I am familiar with the 1022 interactive database system and RUNOFF processing system,” say, “As a lab grader, I kept grading records on the 1022 database management system and composed lab procedures on the RUNOFF text processing system.”

    Avoid being overly informal or overly stiff. Avoid informal terms that sound unprofessional (“Your company sounds like a cool place to work”) as well as stuffy language (“Hitherto, I request the honor of your acquaintance”).

    Never settle for a first draft—or even a second or third. The application letter is your one chance to introduce yourself to a prospective employer. Make it perfect by trimming excess wording, double-checking the tone, and making sure you have connected your qualifications directly to the job. After you are satisfied with the content, proofread repeatedly to spot any factual errors or typos.
    
Dossiers, Portfolios, and E-portfolios

    9.6 Compile a dossier, portfolio, or e-portfolio.

An employer impressed by your résumé and application letter will likely have questions about your credentials and your past work. These questions will be answered, respectively, by your dossier and your portfolio (or e-portfolio).
Dossiers

Your dossier contains your credentials: college transcript, recommendation letters, and other items (such as a scholarship award or commendation letter) that document your achievements. Prospective employers who decide to follow up on your application may request your dossier. By collecting recommendations in one folder, you spare your references from writing the same letter repeatedly.

Your college placement office will usually keep the dossier (or placement folder) on file and send a secure digital copy or mail a print copy to employers. Always keep your own copy, including any nonconfidential recommendation letters. Then, if an employer requests your dossier, you can photocopy and mail it, advising your recipient that the official placement copy is on the way, as sometimes dossiers may not be mailed immediately.
Portfolios and E-portfolios

Portfolios, whether print or digital (e-portfolios, Figure 9.5), allow you to provide a potential employer with additional information and examples pertinent to your job search, such as copies of documents from your dossier as well as writing samples, more information about honors and awards, and multimedia or visual design projects. Your portfolio or e-portfolio would normally contain an introduction or mission statement explaining what you’ve included and why. Do not include items unrelated to the job search or your qualifications. An organized, professional portfolio or e-portfolio shows that you can apply your skills and makes you stand out as a candidate. It also gives you concrete material to discuss during job interviews.
Figure 9.5

An e-portfolio
A figure shows a screen displaying an e-portfolio.
Figure 9.5 Full Alternative Text

As you create your portfolio or e-portfolio, seek advice and feedback from professors in your major and from other people in the field. If you have a portfolio or e-portfolio, indicate this on your résumé, followed by “Available on request” or a link to the Web address for access. If you have an e-portfolio, bring printed copies of the more relevant contents (for instance, your résumé and one writing or design sample) to your interview. Many colleges and universities offer e-portfolio services via their career and student placement centers. You can also find e-portfolio software and templates online; many of these are quite simple to use. LinkedIn and other job sites also offer ways to create e-portfolios. Always check the privacy settings when using a social network or online portfolio site.
Strategies
for Dossiers, Portfolios, and E-portfolios

    Consider an introduction or mission statement. Place this page at the beginning to introduce and explain the contents.

    Collect relevant materials. Gather documents or graphics you’ve prepared in school or on the job, presentations you’ve given, and projects or experiments you’ve worked on. Possible items: campus newspaper articles, reports on course projects, papers that earned an “A,” examples of persuasive argument, documents from an internship, or visuals you’ve designed for an oral presentation.

    Include copies of dossier materials. Although they won’t be official unless they go directly from your campus placement office to your prospective employer, have copies of your college transcript and recommendations on hand to give to employers during the waiting period and/or to post on your e-portfolio.

    Assemble your items. Place your résumé first (after your introduction/mission statement), and use divider pages to separate groups of items. Follow the same structure for an e-portfolio. Position your résumé file immediately below the introduction/mission statement file, and group similar items into appropriate files. In either case, aim for a professional look.

    Omit irrelevant items. Personal photographs and other items more appropriate for a Facebook page do not belong in your portfolio or e-portfolio.

    Omit your street address or phone number from your e-portfolio. If your e-portfolio is available to the public, post only your email address to avoid identity theft. If you post your references, include only their names and comments, not their contact information. Always check the privacy settings with any e-portfolio software.
    
    
Interviews and Follow-up Letters

    9.7 Prepare for job interviews and write professional follow-up communication.

All of your preparation leads to the last stages of the hiring process: the interview and follow-up to the interview.
Interviews

An employer who is impressed by your credentials will arrange an interview. The interview’s purpose is to confirm the employer’s impressions from your application letter, résumé, references, and dossier. If you have an e-portfolio and have shared it with the employer, they will probably have reviewed its contents in advance. But you may also be asked to present portions of your portfolio at the interview. If possible, bring print copies of the most relevant documents, such as your résumé and one of your papers or projects. Offer to leave these copies with the interviewer.

Interviews come in various shapes and sizes. Initial screening interviews are often conducted by phone or Skype. In these cases, if you make the “first cut,” you will be invited to meet with your potential employer. You might meet with a single interviewer, a hiring committee, or several people or committees in succession. You might be interviewed alone or as part of a group of candidates. Interviews can last an hour or less, a full day, or several days. The interview can range from a pleasant chat to a grueling interrogation. Many companies ask questions that may not seem related to the job but are included to observe your critical thinking skills, technical aptitude, or approach to interpersonal conflicts.

Careful preparation is the key to a productive interview. If you haven’t already done so, learn what you can about the company from trade journals, industrial indexes, business magazines (like Forbes, Fortune, and Business Week), and other resources. Request company literature, including the most recent annual report. Speak with people who know about the company, or (well in advance) arrange an informational interview with someone at the company. In addition, visit the company’s Web site. Once you’ve done all this, ask yourself, “Does this job seem like a good fit?” Many organizations use an approach and set of questions that you can research in advance by asking others who have interviewed there, looking around on career networking sites, or by searching online for more information.

In addition to knowing about the company and its interview process, be prepared in other ways. Dress and present yourself appropriately. Be psychologically prepared and confident (but not arrogant). Follow the rules of business etiquette. Unprepared interviewees make mistakes such as the following:

    They know little about the company or what role they would play as an employee in this particular division or department.

    They have inflated ideas about their own worth.

    They have little idea of how their education prepares them for work.

    They dress inappropriately.

    They exhibit little or no self-confidence.

    They have only vague ideas of how they could benefit the employer.

    They inquire only about salary and benefits.

    They speak negatively of former employers or coworkers.

Perhaps the most important way to prepare for an interview is to practice answering typical questions. Think about how you would answer the following:

    Why does this job appeal to you?

    What do you know about our company? About this division or unit?

    What do you know about our core values (for example, informal management structure, commitment to diversity or to the environment)?

    What do you know about the expectations and demands of this job?

    What are the major issues affecting this industry?

    How would you describe yourself as an employee?

    What do you see as your biggest weakness? Biggest strength?

    Can you describe an instance in which you came up with a new and better way of doing something?

    What are your short-term and long-term career goals?

Don’t forget to prepare your own list of well-researched questions about the job and the organization. You will be invited to ask questions, and what you ask can be as revealing as any answers you give.

Finally, tell the truth during the interview—doing so is both ethical and smart. Companies routinely verify an applicant’s claims about education, prior employment, positions held, salary, and personal background. Perhaps you have some past infraction (such as a bad credit rating or a brush with the law) or some pressing personal commitment (such as caring for an elderly parent or a disabled child). Experts suggest that it’s better to air these issues up front—before the employer finds out from other sources. The employer will appreciate your honesty, and you will know exactly where you stand before accepting the job (Fisher 292).
Follow-up Communication

You need to follow up after your interview to (1) thank the potential employer for meeting with you and (2) to accept the job if offered or to refuse the job (because you feel it is a bad fit or because you have accepted a different offer). Traditionally, a handwritten thank you note is considered the most professional way to follow up after a job interview. However, if email has been the primary way you and the potential employer have been communicating, it is fine to email a brief note of thanks. (You can always follow up with a thank you card by mail.) When offering a job, many companies like to call the employee with the good news, then follow up with an email that outlines the offer, usually with attachments (a contract, terms of the offer, salary, and benefits). Whether you decide to accept or you decide to refuse, and whether you choose to do so via a letter or an email, your response should be professionally written, checked for spelling and grammar, and formal in tone. (See Chapter 18 for more on this topic related to the use of email.)
Thank You Note

Within a day or so after the interview, send a thank you note to the person who interviewed you. If you were interviewed by multiple people, send each one an individual thank you note. Not only is this courteous, but it also reinforces a positive impression. Keep your email or note brief, but try to personalize your connection with the reader (Crosby 20).

Open by thanking the interviewer and reemphasizing your interest in the position. Then refer to some details from the interview or some aspect of your visit that would help the interviewer reconnect with the interview experience. If you forgot to mention something important during the interview, include it here—briefly. Finally, close with genuine enthusiasm, and provide your contact information again to make it easy for the interviewer to respond. Following is the text of an effective thank you note from James Purdy, the entry-level candidate in hotel-restaurant management whose résumé and cover letter appeared earlier:

    Thank you for your hospitality during my Tuesday visit to Lake Geneva Resort. I am very interested in the restaurant-management position and was intrigued by our discussion about developing an eclectic regional cuisine.

    Everything about my tour was enjoyable, but I was especially impressed by the friendliness and professionalism of the resort staff. People seem to love working at the Resort, and it’s not hard to see why.

    I’m convinced I would be a productive employee at Lake Geneva Resort and would welcome the chance to prove my abilities. If you need additional information, please call me at (555) 316-2419.

Acceptance or Refusal Note

You may receive a job offer by phone, email, or hard copy (or all three). If by phone, ask when you will receive a written offer and then respond with a formal letter or email of acceptance. The employer may also ask you to sign and return a form indicating your acceptance; be sure to check that the outlined terms match what you discussed by phone. Remember to accept a job offer with enthusiasm. Here is James Purdy’s note of acceptance, sent, as requested by this employer, as an email:

    I am delighted to accept your offer of a position as assistant recreation supervisor at Liberty International’s Lake Geneva Resort, with a starting salary of $44,500.

    As you requested, I will phone Bonnie Dunn in Human Resources for instructions on reporting date, physical exam, and employee orientation.

    I look forward to a long and satisfying career with Liberty International.

You may also have to refuse a job offer, for example, if you receive a preferable offer or decide that the position is not the right fit for you. Even if you refuse by phone, write a prompt and cordial note of refusal, explaining your reasons and allowing for future possibilities. Remember to be diplomatic when refusing a job. A courteous refusal and explanation can let the employer know why you have chosen a competing employer or why you have decided against taking the job for other reasons. Purdy handled one job refusal this way:

    Although I thoroughly enjoyed my visit to your company’s headquarters, I have to decline your offer of a position as assistant desk manager of your London hotel.

    I’ve decided to accept a position with Liberty International because the company has offered me the chance to participate in its manager-trainee program. Also, Liberty will provide tuition for courses in completing my B.S. degree in hospitality management.

    If any future openings should materialize at your Aspen resort, however, I would appreciate your considering me again as a candidate.

    Thank you for your confidence in me.

Strategies
for Interviews and Follow-up Notes

    Confirm the interview’s exact time and location. Arrive early but no more than 10 minutes.

    Don’t show up empty-handed. Bring a briefcase, pen, and notepad. Have your own questions written out. Bring extra copies of your résumé (unfolded) and a portfolio (if appropriate).

    Make a positive first impression. Come dressed as if you already work for the company. Learn the name of your interviewer beforehand so you can greet this person by name—but never by first name unless invited. Extend a firm handshake, smile, and look the interviewer in the eye. Wait to be asked to take a chair. Maintain eye contact much of the time, but don’t stare.

    Don’t worry about having all the answers. When you don’t know the answer to a question, say so, and relax. Interviewers typically do most of the talking.

    Avoid abrupt yes or no answers—as well as life stories. Just saying yes or no doesn’t leave any impression—elaborate on your answers, but also keep them short and to the point.

    Don’t answer questions by merely repeating the material on your résumé. Instead, explain how specific skills and types of experience could be assets to this particular employer.

    Remember to smile often and to be friendly and attentive throughout. Qualifications are not the only reason a person gets hired. People often hire the candidate they like best.

    Never criticize a previous employer. Above all, interviewers like positive attitudes. Complaining about a former employer, whether or not your criticisms are legitimate, only makes you look negative.

    Prepare to ask intelligent questions. When questions are invited, focus on the nature of the job: travel involved, specific responsibilities, typical job assignments, opportunities for further training, types of clients, and so on. Avoid questions that could easily have been answered by your own prior research.

    Take a hint. When your interviewer hints that the meeting is ending (perhaps by checking a watch), restate your interest, ask when a hiring decision is likely to be made, thank the interviewer, and leave.

    Follow up as soon as possible. Send a thank you note to each person with whom you interviewed. Be sure to get the spelling right for each person’s name. You can use email but also follow up with a hard copy thank you note if you feel this is appropriate for the situation.

Checklist
for Résumés

    Does my résumé’s organization (reverse chronological or functional) emphasize my best characteristics?

    Is my contact information accurate?

    Does my objective show a clear sense of purpose?

    Have I included a summary of skills or qualifications, as needed?

    Is my educational background clear and complete?

    Have I accurately but briefly described my previous jobs?

    Have I presented education versus experience in the appropriate sequence?

    Have I included personal data and interests, as appropriate?

    Have I listed references or offered to provide them?

    Have I offered to provide a portfolio, if appropriate?

    Have I used action verbs and keywords?

    Have I limited the résumé to a single page, if possible?

    Is the résumé uncluttered and tasteful?

    For print copies, have I used quality (white) paper?

    If I have a scannable résumé, does it use keywords and effective formatting?

    Am I being scrupulously honest?

    Have I proofread exhaustively?

Checklist
for Job Application Letters

    Is my letter addressed to a specific person?

    If my letter is solicited, do I indicate how I heard about the job?

    If my letter is unsolicited, does it have a forceful opening?

    Does my introduction get directly to the point?

    Does the body section paint a clear picture of qualifications sketched in the résumé?

    Does the conclusion restate my interest and encourage specific action?

    Have I made my case without merely repeating the résumé?

    Is my letter free of “canned” expressions?

    Is my tone confident without being arrogant?

    Have I avoided a tone that is overly formal or overly stiff?

    Have I avoided flattery and exaggeration?

    Have I proofread exhaustively?

    Am I being scrupulously honest?

Checklist
for Supporting Materials

    Is my dossier complete, with letters of recommendation and other supporting materials?

    Is my portfolio or e-portfolio up to date?

    If my portfolio has hyperlinks, are they all functioning?

    Have I prepared for interviews?

    Have I sent the appropriate follow-up correspondence?

Applications
General Applications

    If you have not already prepared a standard résumé, prepare one following the guidelines in this chapter. If you already have a résumé, revise it not only to follow this chapter’s guidelines but also to update your work experience, educational background, and other details. Remember to include persuasive action verbs, design the résumé in an efficient but attractive way, and include all relevant experience.

    Write an application letter applying for a part-time or summer job in response to a specific ad and tailor your résumé for the job. Choose an organization related to your career goals. Identify the exact hours and calendar period during which you are free to work. Submit a copy of the ad along with your letter and résumé.

    A friend has asked you for help with the following application letter. Read it carefully, evaluate its effectiveness, and rewrite it as needed.

        Dear Ms. Brown,

        Please consider my application for the position of assistant in the Engineering Department. I am a second-year student majoring in electrical engineering technology. I am presently an apprentice with your company and would like to continue my employment in the Engineering Department.

        I have six years’ experience in electronics, including two years of engineering studies. I am confident my background will enable me to assist the engineers, and I would appreciate the chance to improve my skills through their knowledge and experience.

        I would appreciate the opportunity to discuss the possibilities and benefits of a position in the Engineering Department at Concord Electric. Please phone me any weekday after 3:00 p.m. at (555) 568-9867. I hope to hear from you soon.

        Sincerely,

    Write an unsolicited application letter to the human resources director of a company that interests you. Go to the company’s Web site to research the various positions for which you may be qualified. Select one, and name that position in your letter. Also learn the name of the human resources director and address your letter to that person. Be sure to grab the reader’s attention, remain persuasive throughout, and conclude with a call to action.

Team Application

Divide into groups and prepare a list of five blogs or news articles written by career professionals that students and other job seekers should visit for advice about application letters and résumés. Write a one-paragraph summary of the ideas found on each site, and include the Web address for that site. Compare the findings of your group with others in your class. See if you can find at least two resources specific to your city, town, or state. If your class is using a learning management system or has a class Wiki, ask your instructor if you can upload your findings to that site.
Global Application

Assume that you and other students in your major would like to work in a particular country after graduation. Select a country and do some research on the economy, culture, and travel issues. Then see what you can learn about job application materials for that country (for instance, are résumés a universal requirement?). Write a short memo that tells prospective students what they need to know about finding employment abroad.
Digital and Social Media Application

Career networking sites usually provide advice for creating résumés, including samples for different careers. Such sites also offer résumé templates and samples. Start with LinkedIn and Monster.com and review the information about how to write a résumé suitable for your career stage and desired profession. Then, set up your own LinkedIn account and begin creating an online profile, based on the content of your résumé. Connect to six or more people on LinkedIn and see what other connections come up. Write a one-page memo for your instructor explaining what you learned about résumés and about LinkedIn in general. Include the Web address for your new profile page.

