Data Analysis Report Prompts

 If you do not want to use your Proposal topic, please select one (1) of the following prompts and write a Data Analysis Report of 5-7 pages.  Include three graphics.

  For each of the following prompts, design a survey of 5-10 questions, using Qualatrics.com or Survey Monkey.com, to distribute to at least 10-20 students, faculty, and/or other employees (depending on the prompt you choose).

 1. Dining Hall usage and preferences

 Collect data on food quality, meal swipes, dining hours.  Analyze patterns or trends and recommend adjustments to menu planning and hours of operation.

 2.  Library usage

  Collect data on hours of operation and availability of study space, particularly at peak times. Identify which times and locations are most crowded and propose better space allocation or a reservation system for study rooms.

 3. Campus transportation

 Gather data on bus usage on campus. Analyze your data and suggest improvements in schedules and on-time pick up, drop off, and accessibility.

 4. Campus parking

 Collect data on the parking situation on campus, including parking passes and the use of Flow Bird.  Are there enough spaces for on-campus students and commuters, based on the number of students on campus at popular class times.  Make recommendations to improve accessibility to parking for on-campus students and commuters.

 5. Online courses

 Gather data on the availability of online courses at the University in selected programs (you decide).  Determine whether there are enough offered per semester, specifically for non-traditional students and those who balance full-time employment and families. Make recommendations for improvement in scheduling to accommodate all students.

 6.  On-campus robotic food delivery

 Survey students and on-campus employees to pool their ideas on the robotic food delivery system. Based on your data collection and analysis, determine if this method of food delivery is an added benefit. Create a series of questions on the cost, availability, and convenience of robotic food service and make recommendations for improvement, if needed.
	
Due on Apr 30, 2026 11:59 PM
