I know this might be a bit hard to understand as I have a hard-time understanding it myself, but apart from the flow of consciousness, try hard to understand the information and why I made an effort to try and explain this unfinished/unpolished schema.

Some thing that might help you understand how the MSS (the mycelium schema standardization) is that it it meant to only hold three main types o f rudimentary values; those being 'incremental-units' (expanding: conceptually it is always a positive integer), 'ordinal-position' (fractal expansion: conceptually this is always a positive and less than 1), and then i guess you would call is a 'samras' table (Shape-Addressed Mixed‑Radix Address Space)

System_id and system_values are sort of both values, the only difference is that a standardization is assumed to build out the samras structures the same across uses, there in a value is an internal reference or a structurally aware reference to the standardize. so its like each local system is its own standardize until it wants to use external references, which it can do with out needing to have have total data awareness, but still maintain a predetermined, decentralized concussion of order.

The SAMRAS specification is domain-agnostic. In the Fruitful Network context, it is used for the taxonomic domain, the administrative division domain, and any hierarchical namespaces like geographic divisions. However, the same addressing rules apply whether the domain is biology, geography or organizational structure.SAMRAS cleanly separates the shape of a hierarchy from any semantic labels attached to nodes. The shape is authoritative and is represented as a count-stream—a list of natural numbers where each number specifies the number of children for a node .

A SAMRAS address is written as a1_a2_..._an, where each ai is the ordinal position among siblings. There is no fixed radix; the maximum allowed value of each ai is determined by the parent's child count. Parent addresses are obtained by dropping the last segment. Children are allocated sequentially in append-only fashion so existing addresses never change. Not every address has to be materialized. SAMRAS allows ghost positions—addressable slots that lack any attached metadata. References may also include existential placeholders (suffix segments of 0) to indicate an unknown descendant rather than a specific node. Because SAMRAS is a structural addressing scheme, reference semantics (exact, group, existential descendant) must be declared explicitly when using an address.

If reordering is needed or if the shape evolves in non-append ways, a new layout version must be published. Existing addresses remain valid under their layout version; no silent remapping is permitted. SAMRAS tables in MSS store these layout versions and the count-streams that define them.

SAMRAS allows addressable positions that have:
    no stored metadata,
    no name,
    no materialized record. These positions are structurally real but semantically undefined.

Seeing as how a given MSS system is a a samras paradigm in of in its self (MSS system is like the mind, and the the local namespace is like an internal dialogue), references inside the MSS are where the standardization comes in beyond an internal name space. reference to a SAMRAS address must declare its intent, and that it partially determined by order. references can only be made to somthing that exists before it in the sequence. So if a reference is with respect to a source of `0`, then you can either do so with respect to `1` or with respect to `k`, where 1 in this instance makes it a real, reference-able object following the conference, and k further expands the fractal. Rules like these exist for single value references, zero value references (simultaneous selection grouping), and multi value references, so MSS entries that reference an internal namespace can reference existential placeholders addresses may include suffix markers (e.g., 0, this is because unlike the MSS, the internal name spaces are only represent a single instance of a strucure rather than abiding by the rules that would make it a dynamic relationship platform that builds itself) to represent:
    an existential but unidentified descendant,
    without asserting group membership or semantic identity. These are reference semantics, not nodes.
    exact — refers to the node at that address.
    group — refers to the set represented by that node.
    existential_descendant — refers to one unknown member below that node. Address syntax alone must not be relied upon to infer semantics.

See a rough example in the anthology draft I provided earlier. In the file, it makes a reference to the nominal ordinal unit element (nop) as a single value reference, in the second layer, with respect to k (arguably synchronous with what I have described but see here below):
      "lcl_samras.2.1.nop": ["6.3-14-5-4-4-6.8-2-1.1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1.4-8.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.1-1-1-1.1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0"],

It is understood that the first value tell you how many top leverl siblings there are, and subsequently, how many following term you can expect will desribe the number of child nodes are with in that parent node, untill eall nodes end with 0. Compare this to its implemention in the file under the layer `g-1` that reference `lcl`(e.g. `      "natural_product.g_1.1.lcl": ["1"]`)
