Chapter 15 Informal Reports
A photo shows the hands of two men wearing suits discussing a bar graph, line graph, and other data presented on a sheet of paper.
Learning Objectives

    15.1 Identify the difference between informational and analytical ­reports.

    15.2 Plan and write progress, periodic activity, and trip reports, as well as meeting minutes.

    15.3 Plan and write feasibility, recommendation, and peer review ­reports.

Chapter Outline

    Two Categories of Reports: Informational and Analytical 

    Types of Informational Reports

        Strategies for Progress Reports

        Strategies for Periodic Activity Reports

        Strategies for Trip Reports

        Strategies for Meeting Minutes

    Types of Analytical Reports

        Strategies for Feasibility Reports

        Strategies for Recommendation Reports

        Strategies for Peer Review Reports

        Checklist for Informal Reports 

    Applications

When you think of reports, you probably picture long, formal documents that ­contain many pages of research, information, charts and graphs, footnotes, and other details. Yet in the workplace, for every long, formal report, dozens of shorter reports are written. These shorter reports typically focus on only one or two very specific issues. Informal reports help people make informed decisions on matters such as the most comfortable office chairs to buy or the best recruit to hire for management training. Unlike long formal reports (discussed in Chapter 16), most informal reports require no extended planning, are prepared quickly, contain little or no background information, and have no front or end matter (title page, table of contents, glossary, works cited, index).

Despite being so focused and concise, informal reports do provide the information and analysis readers need every day on the job. Although various formats can be used, informal reports, especially those intended for internal audiences, most often take the form of a memo. (Depending on the company or organization, the words “memo” or “memorandum” may or may not be used, but a general memo format is followed.) Shorter informal reports can be sent as the body of an email message; slightly longer ones (or reports that need to appear on business letterhead) can be send as an email attachment, typically in PDF to retain proper formatting.

Two Categories of Reports: Informational and Analytical

    15.1 Identify the difference between informational and analytical reports.

In the professional world, decision makers rely on two types of informal reports: Some reports focus primarily on information (“what we’re doing now,” “what we did last month,” “what our customer survey found,” “what went on at the ­department meeting”), while others may also include analysis (“what this information means for us,” “what courses of action should be considered,” “what we recommend, and why”).

The purpose of an informational report is to inform; that is, to provide data and other information to answer basic questions, such as how much progress has been made on a project (progress reports), what activity has taken place over the course of a certain period of time (activity reports), what activity occurred during a business trip (trip reports), or what discussions took place in a meeting (meeting minutes). These reports help keep an organization running from day to day by providing short, timely updates on important activities.

Unlike informational reports, analytical reports offer both information and conclusions based on the information. Analysis is the heart of technical communication. Analysis involves evaluating information, interpreting it accurately, drawing valid conclusions, and making persuasive recommendations. Although gathering and reporting information are essential workplace skills, analysis is ultimately what professionals do to earn their pay. Analytical reports analyze and evaluate whether a project or situation is feasible (feasibility reports), make recommendations on how to proceed (recommendation reports), or constructively critique the work of others (peer review reports).

Types of Informational Reports

    15.2 Plan and write progress, periodic activity, and trip reports, as well as meeting minutes.

Following are the major types of informational reports, with strategies for how to plan and write each type.
Progress Reports

Organizations depend on progress reports (also called status reports) to monitor ­progress and problems on various projects. Progress reports may be written either for internal personnel or outside clients. In the case of internal audiences, managers use progress reports to evaluate projects, monitor employees, decide how to allocate funds, and keep track of delays or expense overages that could dramatically affect outcomes and project costs. In the case of external audiences, progress reports explain to clients how time and money are being spent and how difficulties have been overcome. The reports can therefore be used to assure the client that the project will be completed on schedule and on budget.

Many contracts stipulate the dates and stages when progress will be reported. Failing to report on time may invoke contractual penalties. Some organizations require regular progress reports (daily, weekly, monthly), while others use such reports only as needed, such as when a project milestone has been reached.

Figure 15.1 shows a progress report from a training manager to a company vice president. Because the audience is internal, the writer has chosen memo format. A report like this to an external client might be written in letter format and on company letterhead as a legal record. Notice also how the report provides only those details essential to the reader. In addition, it follows a timeline structure, beginning with a summary of progress on the project (or since the last progress report) and concluding with the next steps to be completed.
Figure 15.1

A Progress Report
A figure shows a progress report.
Figure 15.1 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Progress Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Unless the length is very short, progress reports should be written as a word processing document and delivered as an email attachment. Converting the Word file to PDF ensures that formatting will be retained. In some cases, if the report is for an external client, the document might also be sent in hard copy via surface mail.

    Provide a clear subject line. Progress reports should clearly identify their purpose in the subject line of a memo or email or, if written in the letter, in the introductory paragraph.

    Present information efficiently. Because readers of progress reports are managers or clients who want the bottom-line information as quickly as possible, chunk the information into logically headed sections and use bulleted or numbered lists. Leave out information readers will already know, but do not omit new information.

    Make sure your report answers the anticipated questions. First identify what has been accomplished since the last report; then discuss any important details such as outcomes of meetings, problems encountered and solutions implemented or proposed, deadlines met or missed, resources/materials needed, and so on. Conclude with steps to be completed in time for the next report, with specific dates, if available.

The next example (Figure 15.2) is a progress report written by a student. As you work on a longer report or term project, your instructor might require a progress report. In this example, the student writer documents the progress she has made on her term project: a causal analysis examining the impact of a recently formed town committee.
Periodic Activity Reports

Periodic activity reports resemble progress reports in that they summarize activities over a specified period. But unlike progress reports, which summarize specific accomplishments on a particular project, periodic activity reports summarize general activities during a particular period. Periodic activity reports are almost always internal, written by employees to keep their supervisors up to date on their activities as a whole in order to help managers monitor workload. In many companies, these reports, usually written weekly or monthly, are called “status reports.”

Figure 15.3 shows a periodic activity report, in the form of a weekly status report. Notice how Laura Hardin presents the most vital information first (the ongoing user manuals project) and ends with necessary but less pressing details (vacation time and “other”). The report contains only the information and level of detail her ­supervisor needs.
Figure 15.3

A periodic activity report
A figure shows a periodic activity report.
Figure 15.3 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Periodic Activity Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Short reports, such as weekly status updates, can be written as the body of an email. Longer activity reports should be written as a word processing document and delivered as an email attachment. Converting the Word file to PDF ensures that formatting will be retained.

    Provide a clear subject line. As with any report, identify the exact purpose of a periodic activity report by providing a subject line, such as “Monthly activity report for August.”

    Present information efficiently. All report readers want the bottom line. Omit minor details but include all the essentials. Use headers to chunk information and bulleted and numbered lists to break up dense prose for easier reading.

    Make sure your report answers the expected questions. Begin by describing your most important accomplishments during the period (such as progress on an ongoing project). Then describe any other relevant activity since the last report (such as completion of one-time projects, attendance at meetings, supplies needed, conflicts or problems encountered, schedule changes, vacation time taken or upcoming, and so forth).

Figure 15.2

Progress report on a term project
A figure shows a progress report on a term project.
Figure 15.2 Full Alternative Text
Trip Reports

Trip reports resemble periodic activity reports in that they detail activities during a given period, but they focus specifically on business-related travel rather than a variety of workplace activities. These reports, like periodic activity reports, are written to help supervisors monitor employee activities. In the case of trip reports, when employers pay for employee travel, managers need to know the company is getting its money’s worth. Managers also need to know what employees learn through their travels.

Figure 15.4 shows a trip report written by an employee who has traveled to a branch office to inspect the site and interview those employees about absenteeism and hiring problems at that branch. Because the report is informational, not analytical, it sticks only to the facts. Note also that Bill Moskowicz begins the report with a purpose statement, accounts for how he spent his time, identifies the people with whom he met, offers a summary of what he learned, and provides a conclusion.
Figure 15.4

A trip report
A figure shows a trip report.
Figure 15.4 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Trip Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Many organizations have template or online forms that are required when creating a trip report. If not, trip reports can be written as the body of an email or as a word processing document and delivered as an email attachment. Converting the Word file to PDF ensures that formatting will be retained.

    Take good notes and make accurate transcriptions of interviews. If you must interview people, either ask their permission to record the conversation or take careful notes. Transcribe interviews immediately, while the discussion is still fresh in your mind. If you investigate a location or site, take careful notes of what you observe.

    Write down the names of people and places. Make sure you are able to indicate who you spoke with (spelling their names correctly and getting their job titles right) and the names of places visited.

    Account for times and locations. Demonstrate a good use of your time by accounting for it (but not exhaustively). If you visit more than one location, be clear about what occurred at each.

    Provide a clear title and purpose statement. A clear title indicates exactly which trip you are referring to, including date(s), while a purpose statement at the beginning of the report prevents any possible confusion as to your reasons for taking the trip.

    Use a format that is easy to navigate. As you would in any report, provide clear headings to break up chunks of information and use bulleted/numbered lists, double spacing, and so on, for ease of readability.

    Describe findings completely and objectively. Don’t omit vital information or include irrelevant information, and don’t insert personal impressions—stick to the facts.

Meeting Minutes

Many team or project meetings require someone to record the proceedings. Meeting minutes are the records of such meetings. Copies of minutes are typically distributed to all members and interested parties to track the proceedings and to remind members about their responsibilities. Usually, one person is appointed to record the minutes. Be sure to proofread the minutes, check the spelling of the attendees’ names, and consider how you have described any politically sensitive or confidential issues before sending.

Figure 15.5 shows minutes from a personnel manager’s meeting.
Figure 15.5

Meeting minutes
A figure shows meeting minutes.
Figure 15.5 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Meeting Minutes

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Organizations vary on how they prefer meeting minutes to be distributed. In some companies, meeting minutes are posted on the file server (intranet); in other organizations, meeting minutes may be distributed via email and then saved on shared file space for later reference.

    Take good notes during the meeting. Don’t rely on your memory, even if you write up the minutes immediately after the meeting. Write down who said what, especially if a particularly important point was raised.

    Complete the minutes immediately after the meeting. Even if you take good notes, you may forget the context of a particular point if you wait too long. Write up the minutes immediately.

    Include a clear title with the meeting date. A clear title should indicate the meeting’s exact purpose (“sales conference planning meeting”) and always include the meeting date to prevent confusion with ­similar meetings.

    List attendees. List everyone who attended. If the meeting was chaired or moderated, indicate by whom.

    Describe all agenda items. Make sure all topics discussed are recorded. Your own memory of meeting topics and those of other meeting attendees are usually fleeting.

    Record all decisions or conclusions. If everyone agreed on a point or if a vote was taken, be sure to include those results in your minutes.

    Make sure the minutes are easy to navigate, precise, and factual. Use headings, lists, and other helpful design features. Describe each topic fully yet concisely. Don’t leave out important nuances, but stick to the facts. Keep personal commentary, humor, and “sidebar” comments out of meeting minutes.
    
Types of Analytical Reports

    15.3 Plan and write feasibility, recommendation, and peer review reports.

Following are the major types of analytical reports, with strategies for how to plan and write each type.
Feasibility Reports

Feasibility reports are used when decision makers need to assess whether an idea, plan, or course of action is realistic and practical. Sometimes an idea may make perfect sense from one perspective, but may not be feasible at the moment for one reason or another, usually because of timing. For example, a manufacturing company may want to switch to a more automated process, which would greatly reduce costs over the long term. But in the short term, the resulting layoffs would have a negative impact on morale.

A feasibility report provides answers to questions such as these:

    What is the problem or situation, and what is the best approach to solving or dealing with it?

    Is this course of action likely to succeed?

    Do the benefits outweigh the drawbacks or risks?

    What are the pros and cons, and what are the alternatives?

    Should anything be done at all? Should it wait? Is the timing right?

The answers are based on the writer’s careful research.

Managers and other decision makers are the primary audience for feasibility ­reports. These busy people want to see the recommendation or answer at or near the beginning of the document, followed by supporting evidence and reasoning. In other words, a feasibility report should use the “bottom line first” organizational pattern: here is the situation; here is our recommendation; and here is why this approach is feasible at this time.

Figure 15.6 shows a feasibility report in which a securities analyst for a state pension fund reports to the fund’s manager on the feasibility of investing in a rapidly growing computer maker. Notice how it starts with background, provides a direct recommendation, provides information that supports the recommendation, and ends with a call to action.
Figure 15.6

A feasibility report
A figure shows a feasibility report.
Figure 15.6 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Feasibility Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Unless the length is very short, progress reports should be written as a word processing document and delivered as an email attachment. Converting the Word file to PDF ensures that formatting will be retained. In some cases, if the report is for an external client, the document might also be sent in hard copy via surface mail.

    Make sure the subject line is clear. Always use the word “feasibility” (or a synonym) in the title (“Subject: Feasibility of. . .”).

    Provide background information. Your readers may not always need background information, but if they do, make it short.

    Offer the recommendation near the beginning of the report. Because readers of feasibility reports are interested primarily in the “bottom line,” state it explicitly at the very beginning of the report or just after the background information.

    Provide the details, data, and criteria after the recommendation section. Include supporting data, such as costs, equipment needed, results expected, and so on. Don’t overdo the supporting data, but include everything directly relevant that will persuade readers to support your recommendation.

    Explain why your recommendation is the most feasible of all the possible choices. Your readers may prefer other choices. Persuade them that yours is the best choice.

    End with a call to action.

Recommendation Reports

While a feasibility report sets out to prove that a particular course of action is the right one to take, a recommendation report shortens or even skips the feasibility analysis (since it has already taken place or been discussed) and gets right to the point of making a recommendation. Recommendation reports, like feasibility reports, may include supporting data, but they also state an affirmative position (“Here’s what we should do and why”) rather than examining whether the approach will work (“Should we do it?”). Like feasibility reports, recommendation reports are for the eyes of decision makers, and these documents take a direct stance.

Figure 15.7 shows a recommendation report from a health and safety officer at an airline company to a vice president regarding the workstation comfort of the ­company’s reservation and booking agents. Notice that it is organized similarly to a feasibility report but takes a more authoritative stance based on previous analysis, emphasizing expected rather than possible benefits. Also, a description of the problem and its causes precedes the recommendations.
Figure 15.7

A recommendation report
A figure shows a recommendation report.
Figure 15.7 Full Alternative Text

This is just one example of countless short reports used to examine a workplace problem and recommend a solution.
Strategies
for Recommendation Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. Unless the length is very short, recommendation reports should be written as a word processing document and delivered as an email attachment. Converting the Word file to PDF ensures that formatting will be retained. In some cases, if the report is for an external client, the document might also be sent in hard copy via surface mail.

    Provide a clear subject line. As always, make sure the subject of the report is brief and directly to the point.

    Keep background information short. Keep the background history brief, but do discuss how feasibility has already been determined.

    Discuss the problem or situation prior to making recommendations. In addition to the brief background information, outline the problem or situation that the recommended actions will resolve. Then discuss the recommendations in as much detail as necessary.

    Use an authoritative tone. Take a strong stance and write with confidence, knowing that the recommendation has already been determined to be feasible.

    Use headings and make them as informative as possible. Instead of using the vague heading “Problem,” be specific (“Causes of Agents’ Discomfort”). Don’t forget that you are writing to a “bottom line” audience.

    End with a list of benefits for taking action. Rather than appealing for action, assume action will be taken by reemphasizing the benefits.

Peer Review Reports

Peer review reports are written between employees, providing a way for people (peers) to give each other constructive criticism and feedback. Because peer review reports are shared by colleagues wishing to preserve good workplace relationships, they must be written with tact. (Note that Figure 15.8 illustrates the use of constructive criticism in peer review and can serve as a model for reviewing the work of other students in the classroom.)
Figure 15.8

A peer review report
A figure shows a peer review report.
Figure 15.8 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Peer Review Reports

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. On the job, peer review reports are typically circulated via the organization’s file server (intranet) or as email attachments. In class, you might be asked to upload your peer review report to the class learning management system and to bring a paper copy to class.

    Start with the positives. Briefly state the good points of the reviewed document as a way of leading into and balancing against the criticisms.

    Organize by topic area. Provide separate sections for suggestions about the reviewed document’s writing style, design, use of visuals, and other areas.

    Always provide constructive criticism. Remember that you are reviewing the work of a colleague or colleagues. Review their work tactfully, as you would want them to review your work. However, don’t ignore problem areas.

    Support your criticisms with examples and advice. Point to particular examples in the reviewed document as you discuss them. Suggest alternatives, if possible. Point to helpful resources, if applicable.

    Close positively. End with a friendly, encouraging tone. If the reviewed document is particularly problematic, state as much—but diplomatically.

Checklist
for Informal Reports

    Have I determined the right report type (status report, recommendation report, etc.) for this situation?

    When preparing a progress or status report, have I determined how much detail is necessary to include?

    When taking minutes for a meeting, have I included all the key decisions and discussion items and left out unnecessary detail?

    If I have decided to write a recommendation report, has the feasibility of the project or idea already been determined, or is a feasibility study and report more appropriate at this time?

    For all forms of informal reports, have I used a memo format?

    Is the subject line clear?

    Is the tone professional and polite but direct?

    For any report, have I done enough research so that my position is credible?

    Have I reviewed the Strategies box for my specific report type?

Applications
General Applications

    For this or another class, write a progress report to your instructor, describing the progress you’ve made on a project you are working on (your final project, for instance). Use the strategies suggested in this chapter. Or write a peer review report of a classmate’s draft of an upcoming assignment.

    For a current or past job or internship, write a periodic activity report in which you report on the past week’s activities (actual or typical). Be sure to follow the strategies for periodic activity reports in this chapter.

    Take notes at the next group event or meeting you attend. Write up minutes for the meeting, thinking about how much detail to include and what kinds of information will be useful to the other members of the team.

Team Applications

    With two or three other classmates, identify a dangerous or inconvenient area or situation on campus or in your community (endless cafeteria lines, an unsafe walkway, slippery stairs, a bad campus intersection). Observe the problem for several hours during a peak use period. Write a recommendation report to a specifically identified decision maker (the head of campus security, for example) describing the problem, listing your observations, and making a recommendation.

    Convert the same report into a feasibility report by discussing several different approaches that might be taken and then recommending the feasibility of the approach you prefer.

Global Application

Assume that you are a team leader of a U.S.-based company with offices worldwide. You have been assigned a new manager who is a citizen of another country. This week, you need to write a report recommending that all the staff on your team receive their annual bonuses. You know the tone you would take if your manager were from the United States, but you are uncertain about what tone or level of politeness is appropriate for this new manager. Pick a country and do some research on the Internet about tone, style, and politeness in different cultures, remembering that not everyone in a country or culture is exactly alike. Write a short memo to your instructor explaining what you have learned and how you would shape your recommendation report in this situation.
Digital and Social Media Application

As this chapter illustrates, most informal reports are written for internal audiences. Yet most technical and scientific organizations use social media to publish posts about new research findings (such as new studies about highway safety), public health issues (such as influenza statistics), and current events (such as food safety recalls). These posts typically link to pages or documents that at first glance appear similar to an informal report. Use Twitter and Facebook to look at the posts of federal agencies; for example, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the Department of Agriculture (USDA) or similar state-level agencies. Click on posts that link back to a report. List out the main features of the report: level of technical language and the audience you assume this report was written for; length of report; the report’s title; use of headings. Compare these items with one of the information report types in this chapter (feasibility or recommendation reports would be good comparisons). Write a memo to your instructor noting the similarities and differences between the chapter examples and what you find online, and explain how these differences might relate to the online reports available to external audiences.


