Chapter 17 Proposals
A figure shows a technical proposal, with its table of contents.
Learning Objectives

    17.1 Define proposals and understand the audience and purpose of them.

    17.2 Identify the various types of proposals.

    17.3 Include all of the essential parts when organizing an informal or formal proposal.

Chapter Outline

    Audience and Purpose of Proposals

    Types of Proposals

    Organization of Informal and Formal Proposals

        Strategies for Proposals

        Checklist for Proposals

    Applications

Proposals encourage an audience to take some form of direct action: to authorize a project, purchase a service or product, or support a specific plan for solving a problem. Although often containing the same basic elements as reports (see Chapters 15 and 16), proposals have one specific purpose: to persuade the audience to say “Yes, let’s move ahead with this plan.” This purpose may sound similar to the purpose of a recommendation report. However, while a recommendation report answers the question “What should we do, and why?” a proposal maps out the steps for getting it done: “Here’s what we should do, and here’s how we can do it.”

Proposals are called for in a variety of situations: a request to fund a training program for new employees, a suggestion to change the curriculum of your English or biology department, a bid to the U.S. Department of Energy on a solar energy project, and so on. As a student or as an intern at a nonprofit agency, you might submit a formal grant proposal requesting financial support for a research or community project. If your job depends on funding from outside sources, proposals might be the most important documents you produce. Depending on the situation, proposals may be short (informal) or long (formal) and may be written in the form of a report, a letter, or a memo.

Audience and Purpose of Proposals

    17.1 Define proposals and understand the audience and purpose of them.

In science, business, industry, government, and education, proposals are written for any number of audiences: managers, executives, directors, clients, board members, or community leaders. Inside or outside the organization, these people review various proposals and then decide whether the plans are worthwhile, the projects will materialize, and the services or products are useful.

The singular purpose of proposals is to persuade your audience to say yes to your plan.


Types of Proposals

    17.2 Identify the various types of proposals.

Proposals may be either solicited or unsolicited. Solicited proposals are those that have been requested by a manager, client, or customer. For example, if you represent an engineering firm specializing in highway construction, you may receive a request for proposal (RFP) from a local township asking you to bid on a road project. Typically, an RFP is issued to numerous companies, and your proposal will need to stack up against all the others. Unsolicited proposals are those that have not been requested. If you are a new advertising agency in town, you may send out short unsolicited proposals to local radio stations suggesting that they use your agency for their advertising needs.

Because the audience for a solicited proposal has made a specific request, you will not need to spend time introducing yourself or providing background on the product or service. For an unsolicited proposal (sometimes termed a “cold call” in sales), you will need to catch readers’ attention quickly and provide incentives for them to continue reading: perhaps by printing a price comparison of your fees on the first page, for example.

Proposals may also be informal or formal. Informal proposals, like informal reports, can take the form of an email or memo (if distributed within an organization) or a letter (when sent outside an organization). Formal proposals, meanwhile, take on a similar format as formal reports (see Chapter 16), typically including front matter, the text of the report, and end matter, if applicable. Formal proposals will be discussed later in this chapter.

Both solicited and unsolicited proposals, whether informal or formal, fall into three categories: planning proposals, research proposals, and sales proposals.
Planning Proposals

Planning proposals offer solutions to a problem or suggestions for improvement. A planning proposal might be a request for funding to expand the campus newspaper (as in the formal proposal at the end of this chapter), an architectural plan for new facilities at a ski area, or a plan to develop energy alternatives to fossil fuels.

Figure 17.1 is a solicited, informal planning proposal that will be used by bank loan officers when deciding whether to grant a construction loan. Because this document is addressed to external readers, it is cast as a letter. For specific advice on how to approach planning proposals, read the annotations accompanying Figure 17.1 and see the Strategies for Proposals on pages 316–317.
Figure 17.1

A planning proposal
A figure shows a planning proposal.
Figure 17.1 Full Alternative Text
Research Proposals

Research (or grant) proposals request approval and funding for research projects. For example, a chemist at a university might address a research proposal to the Environmental Protection Agency for funds to identify toxic contaminants in local groundwater. Research proposals are solicited by many agencies, including the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. Each agency has its own requirements and guidelines for proposal format and content. Successful research proposals follow these guidelines and carefully articulate the goals of the project. In these cases, proposal readers will generally be other scientists, so writers can use language appropriate for other experts (as in the Appendix in Figure 16.4, page 306).

Figure 17.2 is a solicited, informal research proposal from an employee in the marketing and research department to her supervisor, proposing to conduct research into management-employee relations at a single location of the company that has experienced problems in this area. Because this document is addressed to an internal reader (the supervisor), it has been cast as a memo. For specific advice on how to approach research proposals, read the annotations accompanying Figure 17.2 and see the Strategies for Proposals on pages 317–318.
Figure 17.2

A research proposal (memo format)
A figure shows a research proposal (memo format).
Figure 17.2 Full Alternative Text
Sales Proposals

Sales proposals offer services or products and may be solicited or unsolicited. If solicited, several firms may be competing for the same contract, so submitted proposals may be ranked by a committee. Sales proposals can be cast as letters if the situation calls for them to be brief. If the situation requires a longer proposal, include the various parts and elements of formal proposals. A successful sales proposal persuades customers that your product or service surpasses those of any competitors. What you include in a sales proposal is determined by the guidelines from the client or by a thorough analysis of the kinds of information your audience needs.

Figure 17.3 is an example of a solicited, informal sales proposal, in which the writer explains why her machinery is best for the job, what qualifications her company can offer, and what costs are involved. As with Figure 17.1, because this document is addressed to external readers, it is cast as a letter. For specific advice on how to approach sales proposals, read the annotations accompanying Figure 17.3 and see the Strategies for Proposals on pages 317–318.
Figure 17.3

A sales proposal
A figure shows a sales proposal.
Figure 17.3 Full Alternative Text

Organization of Informal and Formal Proposals

    17.3 Include all of the essential parts when organizing an informal or formal proposal.

No matter the type, all proposals must move in a logical direction from problem/ situation to solution/resolution. All effective proposals typically include a clear title or subject line; background information; a statement of the problem or situation; a description of how to solve the problem or resolve the situation; a breakdown of costs, timing, or qualifications (if applicable); and a conclusion that induces readers to act.

Formal proposals typically require front matter, including a title page, a table of contents, an abstract or executive summary, and possibly a letter of transmittal. End matter would include appendices and a list of sources cited (if the formal proposal has entailed research, which it usually will). For more information on these components, see Chapter 16 (pages 288–291); front matter and end matter are presented in the same way in a formal proposal as in a formal report.
Clear Title or Subject Line

State the proposal’s purpose with a clear and complete title, such as “Recommended Wastewater Treatment System for the MudPie Resort and Spa,” (for a formal proposal) or a subject line (in an informal proposal). Avoid being vague or overly general. An overworked decision maker facing a stack of proposals might very well decide that a proposal lacking a clear, focused title or subject line probably will be unclear and unfocused in its content, too.
Background Information

A background section can be brief or long. In Figure 17.1, the writer’s opening sentence (“As we discussed in our meeting on March 6 . . .”) provides a quick reminder of the context for the project. This sentence is brief because the reader is already familiar with the project. For a new audience or in an unsolicited proposal, you may need to provide a longer paragraph (or, in the case of a formal proposal, a full introduction) with background information on the project. If the topic warrants, the background section may take up several pages.
Statement of Problem or Situation

The problem or situation and its resolution form the backbone of any proposal. Describe the problem or situation statement in either the background portion of your proposal or in its own headed section. For example, a good statement of the problem or situation might be: “Complaints about noise in our college library call for a plan that will make areas of the library quiet enough for serious study.”
Description of Solution or Resolution

The bulk of the proposal should map out your plan to solve the problem or resolve the situation. Include in this section as much detail as needed for your audience to evaluate the soundness of your plan. If the plan is vague or unrealistic, the proposal will be rejected.
Costs, Timing, and Qualifications

If your proposal involves financial outlay, timing sensitivity, or proof of your qualifications, provide separate sections dealing with these factors. Make sure your breakdown of costs and timing is accurate, easy to understand, and realistic. If you work with an accountant or other financial specialist, ask that person to check your cost figures. If the proposal is solicited, make sure you follow the client’s guidelines for establishing a budget and/or schedule.
Conclusion

The conclusion reaffirms the need for your plan and induces the audience to act. A conclusion does not need to be more than a sentence or two in an informal proposal (longer, of course, in a formal proposal), but no matter the length, always end on a strong note with a conclusion that is assertive, confident, and encouraging.
Strategies
for Proposals

    Choose an appropriate delivery format. See Chapter 16 (page 291) for this same strategy as applied to reports.

    Consider your audience and purpose. Remember that your audience consists of decision makers; therefore, the purpose of any proposal must be to convince the decision makers to say yes to what you propose.

    Understand the audience’s needs. Proposal audiences want specific suggestions to meet their specific needs. Their main question will be “What will this plan do for me?” Demonstrate a clear understanding of the audience’s problem or situation, and then offer an appropriate solution or resolution.

    Perform research as needed. Research the very latest technology for solving a problem or resolving a situation; compare the costs, benefits, and drawbacks of various approaches; contact others in your field for their suggestions; find out what competitors are up to; and so on.

    Be sure to credit information sources and contributors. Complex proposals rarely emerge from thin air, and proposals are often a result of a team effort. If anything in your proposal represents the work or input of others, document the sources or acknowledge fellow contributors.

    Use an appropriate document type and delivery format. For an informal proposal distributed internally, use the body of an email (if brief) or a memo. For an informal proposal distributed externally, use a letter. For a formal proposal distributed internally, include all the required components and use an email attachment or your company’s Intranet. For a formal proposal distributed externally, include all the required components and provide a letter of transmittal.

    Provide a clear title or subject line and background information. Draw readers into your proposal with a title or subject line that describes the content of the proposal exactly, and orient your readers with the appropriate background information.

    Follow a problem-to-solution or situation-to-resolution organizational pattern. All proposals should move in this sequence from beginning to end.

    Spell out the problem (and its causes) or situation clearly and convincingly. Provide enough detail for your audience to appreciate the importance of the problem or situation. Answer the implied question, “Why is this such a big deal?”

    Point out the benefits of solving the problem. Answer the implied question, “Why should we spend time, money, and effort to do this?”

    Offer a realistic solution or resolution. Stick to claims or assertions you can support. Answer the implied question, “How do we know this will work?” If the solution or resolution involves accounting for costs, budgeting time, or proving your qualifications, include this information.

    Address anticipated objections to your solution. Decision makers typically approach a proposal with skepticism, especially if the project will cost them money and time. Answer the implied question, “Why should we accept the things that seem wrong with your plan?”

    Include all necessary details, but don’t overload. Include as much supporting detail as you need to induce readers to say yes to your proposal. Leave nothing to guesswork. At the same time, don’t overload your readers with information that is not directly relevant.

    Write clearly and concisely. Make sure your document is easy to read, uses action verbs, and avoids puffed-up language or terms that are too technical for your audience. If necessary for a mixed audience with differing technical levels, include a glossary.

    Express confidence. You are trying to sell yourself, your ideas, or your services to a skeptical audience. Be upfront about the supporting facts and state your case directly.

    Make honest and supportable claims. Because they often involve large sums of money, investments of time, and contractual obligations, proposals require a solid ethical and legal foundation. Don’t make false promises, and if the solutions you offer have limitations, say so.

    Induce readers to act. Decide exactly what you want readers to do, and give reasons why they should be the ones to act. In your conclusion, answer the implied question, “What action am I supposed to take?”

A Sample Formal Proposal

Figure 17.4 was written because a state university’s newspaper (SMU Torch) is struggling to meet rising costs. Because of budget cuts, the newspaper received no funding increase for three years. Bill Trippe, the Torch’s business manager, must justify a requested increase of 20.6 percent. Before drafting his proposal, Bill analyzed the audience and purpose. He determined that the primary audience (the Student Fee Allocation Committee) would use the document to decide whether to grant the additional funds and that therefore, the primary purpose must be to provide a convincing rationale. Bill has thus included a detailed plan for reducing existing operating costs, a section outlining next year’s projected costs, and an appendix comparing the Torch’s performance with that of other nearby college newspapers. These materials demonstrate how Bill has anticipated his audience’s possible objections.
Figure 17.4

A formal proposal
An image shows a formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows the continuation of the formal proposal.
17.3-1 Full Alternative Text

Checklist
for Proposals

    Have I identified whether my proposal is solicited or unsolicited, and have I planned accordingly?

    Have I determined whether my proposal should be informal or formal?

    Have I identified whether my proposal is a planning, research, or sales proposal?

    Does my proposal follow a problem-solution or situation-resolution pattern?

    Have I done adequate research?

    Have I provided a clear title or subject line?

    Is the problem or situation clearly identified in the introduction?

    Is the background section appropriate for this audience’s needs?

    Does the proposal maintain a clear focus on benefits?

    Is the proposed solution or resolution appropriate and realistic?

    Is the cost, budget, and/or qualifications section accurate and easy to understand?

    Are my claims honest and supportable?

    Are all foreseeable limitations identified?

    Are visuals, if needed, used effectively?

    Is my writing style clear, concise, and confident?

    Does the proposal end with a call to action?

Applications
General Applications

    After identifying your primary and secondary audience, write a short planning proposal for improving an unsatisfactory situation in the classroom, on the job, or in your dorm or apartment (e.g., poor lighting, lack of wi-fi, health hazards, poor seating arrangements). Choose a problem or situation whose solution or resolution is more a matter of common sense and lucid observation than of intensive research. Be sure to (a) identify the problem clearly, give a brief background, and stimulate interest; (b) clearly state the methods proposed to solve the problem; and (c) conclude with a statement designed to gain audience support.

    Write a research proposal to your instructor (or an interested third party) requesting approval for your final term project (a formal analytical report or formal proposal). Verify that adequate primary and secondary sources are available. Convince your audience of the soundness and usefulness of the project.

    As an alternate term project to the formal analytical report (Chapter 16), develop a long proposal for solving a problem, improving a situation, or satisfying a need in your school, community, or job. Choose a subject sufficiently complex to justify a formal proposal, a topic requiring research (mostly primary). Identify an audience (other than your instructor) who will use your proposal for a specific purpose. Complete an Audience and Purpose Profile.

Team Application

Working in groups of four, develop an unsolicited planning proposal for solving a problem, improving a situation, or satisfying a need in your school, community, or workplace. Begin by brainstorming as a group to come up witha list of possible issues or problems to address in your proposal. Narrow your list, and work as a group to focus on a specific issue or idea. Your proposal should address a clearly identified audience of decision makers and stakeholders in the given issue. Complete an Audience and Purpose Profile.
Global Application

For this application, interview an expert in international business (a professor in the business school; someone you met on the job; a manager from your internship; someone in the study abroad office). You can also search the Web for information on international business and find a blog or series of articles by an expert. Focus on one particular country of interest. See what you can find out about how proposals are prepared in other countries or in situations where the proposal is prepared in the United States but delivered to readers in other countries. Are there particular issues about formatting, page count, style and tone, use of visuals, and other items that need to be considered? Describe your findings in a short memo that you will share with your classmates.
Digital and Social Media Application

Solicited proposals are usually written in response to a formal “request for proposal” (RFP). Search on “solicited proposals” and then add the name of a funding agency of interest to you. For example, if you are in the sciences, you can include “NSF” (short for the National Science Foundation). Or, if you are in a health career major, try “NIH” (short for the National Institutes of Health). Also, see if that agency uses Facebook and Twitter, and find out if calls for proposals (CFPs) are ever posted to those social media sites. You can also look at other agencies (both state and federal) that deal with agriculture, public health, education, finance, and so forth. Find an RFP and examine the requirements. Does the agency’s Web site offer sample proposals for you to review? How long should the proposals be? Are there any pre-proposal requirements? Write a memo to your instructor explaining what you found, why you are interested in this research, and what focus a proposal would take.
