Chapter 19 Blogs, Wikis, and Web Pages
A photo shows a webpage of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, on a computer screen.
Learning Objectives

    19.1 Differentiate between internal and external blogs.

    19.2 Describe the different functions of internal and external wikis.

    19.3 Understand the business uses of Web pages.

    19.4 Consider audience and purpose before designing and writing a Web page.

    19.5 Design and write an effective Web page.

    19.6 Explain credibility and privacy considerations in Web-based communication.

Chapter Outline

    Blogs

    Wikis

    Web Pages

    Audience and Purpose of Web Pages 

    Elements of Effective Web Pages

    Web Page Credibility and Privacy Issues

        Strategies for Blogs, Wikis, and Web Pages

        Checklist for Blogs Wikis, and Web Pages

    Applications 

Blogs, wikis, and Web pages are important forms of workplace communication for companies and organizations. Blogs began as forums for people to write about and discuss political topics, hobbies, and personal interests. Today, blogs have much wider uses. Wikis allow organizations to keep technical and scientific content updated and current, based on input from individual contributors. Web pages are essential for almost all organizations, large or small, as ways to advertise, maintain a visible presence, and provide information to customers.

Blogs

    19.1 Differentiate between internal and external blogs.

Blogs can be either internal or external. Internal blogs help employees network with each other, while external blogs help companies stay in touch with customers and clients.
Internal Blogs

Internal blogs enhance workflow and morale. In large organizations, blogs can provide an alternative to email for routine in-house communication. Anyone in the network can post a message or comment on other messages. In the blogging environment, meetings can be conducted without the time and location constraints of face-to-face meetings. Employee training can be delivered, and updates about company developments can be circulated. Blogs are especially useful for collaborating. For example, someone in a company’s engineering department can create a forum to discuss various solutions to a technical problem.
External Blogs

While internal blogs are used for in-house communication, external blogs are written with a broader audience in mind. External blogs help organizations stay in touch with the public by providing updates on products, services, research findings, and other current and newsworthy events. Blogs offer a space for large organizations to show a more personal side, to respond amiably and quickly to customer concerns, and to allow readers to provide ideas and feedback. Tone, of course, is critical on an external blog; the writing needs to sound friendly, welcoming, and sincere.

Increasingly, the content on a blog will often mirror what gets posted to the organization’s Facebook page and Twitter feed, but blogs offer additional options such as a search function, a sign-in feature for receiving email alerts, and an RSS feed option (RSS stands for “really simple syndication” and is also known as a Web feed or a news feed.) Government and nonprofit organizations, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National Wildlife Federation, as well as corporations both large and small, use external blogs for a variety of topics.

Wikis

    19.2 Describe the different functions of internal and external wikis.

Wikis (from the Hawaiian phrase wiki wiki, meaning “quick”) are used to collect information and keep this information updated. Most people are familiar with Wikipedia, an online encyclopedia for which anyone can write or revise the content. Like blogs, wikis are either internal or external.
Internal Wikis

In the workplace, wikis also allow for the sharing and updating of content, but they serve a different function: to allow employees within a company (or outside the company, if given password access) to update technical, scientific, project-related, and other information. Typically, people can log on to the wiki and make changes to content, overwriting previous versions. Despite the potential for abuse created by such alterations, most workplace wikis tend to be self-regulating: contributors notice mistakes and correct any errors. A well-managed wiki can be a valuable resource among trustworthy contributors. To ensure that serial edits do not end up distorting the original posting, copies of the original along with each subsequent edit are saved for later reference. (To see how this process works, go to Wikipedia and click on “revision history.” Workplace wikis typically have similar history pages.)
External Wikis

While some wikis are used only internally by a company or organization, others are used by external audiences in specific scientific or technical areas. Because these wikis are open to countless people with knowledge in the fields, these sites can be excellent external sources of information. But as with Wikipedia, the lack of gatekeeping by a central editor also creates the potential for inaccuracy. A well-managed wiki, one that balances open access with editorial control, can be a valuable resource. If you search for a wiki related to your undergraduate major (nursing, chemistry, engineering, technical writing), you may find some useful resources. Or you may find that a Wikipedia entry on this topic contains a link to a more specific external wiki.

Web Pages

    19.3 Understand the business uses of Web pages.

Most organizations, whether private or public, large or small, have a Web site. When compared with print, online information can be updated quickly and easily. Also, Web sites are interactive: People can provide input, download files, place orders, and follow hyperlinks to new or related information. Figure 19.1 shows a Web page from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration on bug bites and bee stings. Interactive features include a list of consumer updates and questions that readers can click on for more information, a search box, and a resources section.
Figure 19.1

An interactive Web page
A figure shows an interactive Web page.

Source: U.S. Food and Drug Administration from <http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm048022.htm>.
Figure 19.1 Full Alternative Text

Note that Web site refers to an entire site with all related pages; Web page refers to one single page. The rest of this section discusses elements of effective Web page writing and design.

Web site development is a complex process that changes as related technologies change. Professional Web site development requires training in visual communication, information design, and programming. Moreover, Web development is primarily a collaborative process, often involving content providers, information architects, graphic designers, computer programmers, and marketers. Nevertheless, especially in small businesses and nonprofit organizations, writing and designing for the Web often become the responsibility of everyday employees. This section introduces the basics of writing and designing Web pages. The Strategies on pages 352–353 provide a basic overview of the process.

Audience and Purpose of Web Pages

    19.4 Consider audience and purpose before designing and writing a Web page.

As with any technical documents, you must first think carefully about your intended audience and purpose before designing and writing a Web page.

Consider the audience for a Web page by filling out an Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet (see Chapter 3). Does the primary audience consist of potential customers or others who are seeking information, of people buying a product or service, of customers needing product support, or of some combination? Who is the secondary audience?

Will your audience members be proficient at navigating a complex Web page, or will they need a help menu and a feedback mechanism (email address, phone number) if they have questions? Will the page be read by audiences fluent in English or nonnative speakers of English or nonspeakers of English? Unless your page is aimed at a highly technical audience, use plain, noncolloquial English that is easily understood by anyone with basic English proficiency and easily translatable into other languages.

Is the Web page’s purpose to publish information, explain a task, sell a product or promote an idea, solicit customer feedback, or some combination? If you want to sell something to technologically savvy young audiences, the page will need to convey a cutting-edge image, employing the latest Web technologies (animation, interaction, complex design). Begin by writing a purpose statement, such as “The purpose of this Web page is both to sell our new mp3 and video players to a young, hip audience and to provide instructions, contact information, downloads, and feedback options for those who already own one.”

Elements of Effective Web Pages

    19.5 Design and write an effective Web page.

Both print documents and Web pages must follow the same basic principles of understandable structure (Chapter 5), readable style (Chapter 6), audience-centered visuals (Chapter 7), and a user-friendly design (Chapter 8). However, because Web pages and print pages are read differently, some of these elements play out differently in the online environment. As you read though this section, refer to Figure 19.3, a user-friendly Web page, and note how structure, style, visual, and design elements both resemble and differ from print pages.
Figure 19.2

A storyboard sketch for a home page
A figure shows a storyboard sketch for a home page.
Figure 19.2 Full Alternative Text
Structure

As discussed in Chapter 5, the three approaches in planning a print document’s structure are outlining, chunking, and sequencing. This section discusses how these approaches apply to Web pages.
Outlining (Storyboarding)

For a simple print document, you would create a basic introduction–body–conclusion outline. A longer print document would require a more detailed formal outline using alphanumeric notation, as in Figure 5.3 in Chapter 5. But instead of outlining a Web page, create a storyboard (a handwritten sketch of the page, as in Figure 19.2). This type of storyboard for a Web site is often called a site map.

Most of us have visited Web pages that have no apparent logical organization. A well-designed Web page is storyboarded in advance so that readers can follow the information flow and locate what they seek. The page should be organized so that its main purpose stands out.

In Figure 19.3, the home page of the National Park Service Web site, the name of the organization stands out prominently on the page in white text over a black background. This header and the pull-down menus directly beneath grab readers’ attention and encourage them to explore the site further. Other information on the page has been storyboarded into subcategories for further exploration.
Figure 19.3

A user-friendly Web page
A figure shows a user-friendly Web page.

Source: From the National Park Service www.nps.gov/index.htm.
Figure 19.3 Full Alternative Text
Chunking

Readers expect information to be in small and easy-to-digest chunks. Computers are associated with speed, and users are impatient with long blocks of online information. Also, the flickering light patterns of computer screens tire the eyes.

How you chunk the information depends on how your audience will interact with the site. Imagine you are writing text for a Web site intended to explain a medical procedure to patients. You decide to organize this information by questions users might ask: “How long will the surgery last?” or “When will I be able to return to work?” You would chunk your information into those categories, possibly making each an individual link.

Figure 19.3 chunks its content by News, Events, and Photos and Multimedia.
Sequencing

A print document follows a logical, linear sequence: spatial, chronological, problem-solution, or cause-and-effect. A Web page should also follow a logical sequence, even though people tend not to read Web pages in linear fashion. A typical site displays information in a hypertext format, allowing readers to move from link to link, often randomly. Each chunk of text on a Web page must therefore make sense by itself, regardless of its order in the original sequence.

In Figure 19.3, the information is sequenced from general (Find a park) to specific (News; Events).
Style

As explained previously, information on the Web must be presented in small, easy-to-digest chunks. Be especially attentive to conciseness by avoiding wordiness and eliminating repetition and redundancy. Figure 19.3 uses short headings and phrases to help readers find the section they are looking for.
Visuals

As discussed in Chapter 8, use visuals to perform a function rather than merely dress up the page. Figure 19.3 uses photos nicely, at the top of the page and then for each section. The photos help draw the reader to the page, but they do not overwhelm with too much visual information.
Design

Like printed documents, Web pages must be designed for consistency, cohesiveness, navigation, and emphasis (see Chapter 8); however, some individual design elements serve a different function online than in print documents. The trend in Web design is toward something called “universal design,” which refers to making design choices that keep the page clean, easy to navigate, accessible, and usable to people with differing levels of vision, left or right handedness, and different ages. For more details, search on “universal Web site design” or “accessible Web site design” and look for organizations such as usability.gov and the World Wide Web Consortium (WC3). Also, see the Digital and Social Media application at the end of this chapter.
Grid Patterns

Web pages typically use a combination of horizontal and vertical grid patterns, as in Figure 19.3. The key information on the page is presented horizontally and takes visual precedence; other information is presented in columns.
White Space

Readers get frustrated with Web pages that have a cluttered look, where too many elements are crammed together without space between. Figure 19.3, on the other hand, has an open feel. Each element is surrounded by plenty of white space.
Font Style and Size

Use a consistent base font style and size throughout the site. In addition, choose a font style and size that will be easy on readers’ eyes. In most cases, use a sans serif font in a 10- to 12-point or larger size.

In Figure 19.3, the font is a simple sans serif that looks professional. Note also how the font styles of various site elements complement each other.
Headings

In Figure 19.3, headings set off each item, and links enable readers to connect to separate pages they want to view.
Color, Shading, Italic, Bold, and Underlining

On a Web page, use color, shading, or italics (sparingly) to emphasize particular words or phrases, but do not use bold or underlining, which signifies a hyperlink.
Bulleted and Numbered Lists

Bulleted and numbered lists enhance readability by extracting from a dense paragraph interrelated items or items that fall into a sequence or process. Because the Web environment calls for small chunks of texts and ease of reading on a screen, use lists generously.

Web Page Credibility and Privacy Issues

    19.6 Explain credibility and privacy considerations in Web-based communication.

The power of a Web page to convey information instantaneously and worldwide, using images, sound, and text, increases the need for sound judgment on the part of everyone involved, from technical writers to Web designers to software developers.

Consider the speed of the Internet, its global reach, and a Web page’s ability to combine sound, color, images, text, interactivity, and more. These multimedia features allow for efficient and effective communication but at the same time make it easy to create sites that are manipulative and distorted. Imagine a Web site for an herbal remedy that some people feel is helpful for anxiety. This herbal remedy may not have Food and Drug Administration approval, may never have been subjected to clinical trials or other objective research, and may have harmful side effects. But a Web site promoting this product can easily, and with very little cost, be set up to look extremely scientific and factual. Fancy logos from quasi-scientific organizations might give the page a sense of professional credibility. Statistics, charts, and links to other Web sites might create the appearance of a valid medical site. As a communicator setting up such a site, you need to question the possible risks for people reading the site who might, in turn, purchase the product.

Web pages also raise important privacy concerns, especially in terms of behind-the-scenes technologies that gather the personal information of visitors to the site. Most credible organizations will write and display a link so readers can review the organization’s Web site privacy statement. These statements let readers know how information will be used and what rights readers have. As a technical communicator, you may be asked to help write such a privacy statement. Web site privacy statements should be readily available on a site (a visible link or button), and they should be written in language anyone can understand. Updates should be noted by including a date that indicates when the privacy statement was last revised. Include a way for readers to be in touch if they have questions or concerns.
Strategies
for Blogs, Wikis, and Web Pages
Blogs and Wikis

    Keep content brief, to the point, and concise. Avoid wordiness and repetition.

    Write differently for internal versus external audiences. Internal audiences do not require as much background. External audiences may need more explanation.

    For an external blog, focus on the customer’s priorities and needs. A friendly, encouraging tone goes a long way in good customer relations.

    Check blog and wiki entries for credibility. Check the content to see when the blog or wiki was last ­updated (usually under the “history” tab on a wiki).

Web Pages

    Identify the intended audience. Who is the primary audience? Who is the secondary audience? Will your audience be Web savvy? Will the audience include worldwide readers?

    Decide on the page’s purpose. Is the purpose to inform, instruct, persuade, or some combination?

    Decide what the page will contain. Will it display print only or a combination of print and graphics? Will it include audio and video? Will links be provided and, if so, how many and to where? Will user feedback be solicited and, if so, in what form: surveys, email comments, or other?

    Create an understandable structure. Map out your Web page with a storyboard that illustrates which parts of the page will go where and that provides ways to navigate. Chunk information into short passages that are easy to access and quick to read. Provide a logical sequence (even if readers won’t necessarily follow it).

    Write with a readable style. Write clearly, concisely, fluently, and personably, with special emphasis on conciseness.

    Use visuals. Include visuals that serve a useful purpose, not merely a decorative one. Select simple and complementary colors.

    Design an accessible page. Combine grid patterns as needed; provide ample margins, consistent justification, plenty of white space, consistent line spacing, and a simple and readable font. Use headings to chunk text on a single page, color/shading/italics for emphasis, and lists whenever appropriate. Follow guidelines for universal design or accessible design, as appropriate for your project.

    Proofread your page. Verify the accuracy of numbers, dates, and data; check for spelling or grammar errors.

    Attend to risk considerations. Consider whether your page in any way exploits users. If you use copyrighted information, be aware of fair use guidelines. When in doubt, request permission. If your page asks individuals for private information, create a privacy statement.

    Maintain your page. Review and update the page often and redesign as needed.

Checklist
for Blogs, Wikis, and Web Pages
Blogs and Wikis

    Have I determined if a blog or wiki should be internal (for employees only) or external (for outside audiences)?

    Are blog or wiki entries written clearly, avoiding wordiness and repetition?

    Have I checked blog or wiki entries for credibility and truthfulness?

    For external blogs or wikis, have I provided enough background and context for this audience?

    For external blogs or wikis, is the tone friendly, welcoming, and sincere?

    Have I determined if the blog or wiki should include an RSS feed?

Web Pages

    Have I assessed my audience and purpose before planning the Web page?

    Did I create a storyboard to plan the overall structure?

    Have I chunked information into small pieces for ease of reading on the Web?

    Did I sequence the information logically (even if it may not be read in its original order on the Web)?

    Did I use (but not overuse) visuals, including color?

    Have I used consistent grid patterns when creating multiple Web pages for the same site?

    Have I provided ample white space?

    Have I used a consistent and readable font style and size?

    Did I use headings to chunk text on a single Web page and links to navigate to other pages?

    Does the page include any color, shading, and italics to highlight key information?

    Have I avoided the use of bold and underlining, except to indicate hyperlinks?

    Have I provided a search option and links to other pages within or outside of my site?

    Have I attended to credibility and privacy considerations?

    Have I proofread the page before going “live”?

Applications
General Applications

    Locate one or more blogs related to technical communication or to your major. Follow the discussion for a few days, and write a brief analysis of the chosen blog, its intended audience, its content areas, and its value to members in the field. On what basis did you determine the blog to be a credible source? Make a list of items that influenced your selection of this blog, and discuss this list in class.

    With a classmate, locate one or two Web sites you might use as research sources for a project. Using the guidelines in this chapter, assess these Web sites for the quality of their structure, style, use of visuals, and design. As in the above, make notes about what items influenced your choice of this site as a credible resource. Write up your findings in an email message to your instructor. Include the Web address for each of the sites you used.

Team Application

In teams of two, find a blog written for an external audience. Analyze the writing style and tone of the blog. In what ways does the blog maintain a professional tone but still sound personal and friendly? Is the blog used mainly to provide updates, or is there also some commenting or other interaction on the site? How are visuals used on the blog? Write a short summary of your thoughts to share with class.
Global Application

Blogs, wikis, and Web pages have global reach—you can use these tools to collaborate with team members from other countries. Locate a wiki related to your major (hint: try searching on “chemistry wiki” or similar). See if the wiki is available in languages other than English. Write a memo to your instructor explaining what you found.
Digital and Social Media Application

Web designers should follow best practices on writing for the Web and on Web site design. For both topics, go online and find credible sources that provide guidelines for universal design (sometimes also called accessible design). Look at sites such as usability.gov, the World Wide Web Consortium (WC3), and the Nielsen Norman Group. These three sites will lead you to other organizations (such as groups that focus specifically on creating Web sites with seniors in mind or groups that offer guidance about sites that can be easily read by automated screen readers for people who are blind or visually impaired). Using your findings as a guide, locate three Web sites that exemplify the principles of effective Web design and style. Prepare a short presentation on your exemplary sites, and explain why you selected them as examples.


