Chapter 10 Memos and Letters
A photo shows a laptop on a table with a cell phone next to it.
Learning Objectives

    10.1 Explain the importance of a workplace memo and identify its parts and format.

    10.2 Determine when to take a direct or indirect approach in a memo.

    10.3 Write an effective transmittal, summary/follow-up, or ­informational memo.

    10.4 Describe the importance of a workplace letter and identify its parts and formats.

    10.5 Understand the aspects of good letter tone, including maintaining a “you” attitude and using plain English.

    10.6 Write an effective inquiry, claim, sales, or adjustment letter.

Chapter Outline

    Memo Basics, Parts, and Format

    Memo Tone

    Types of Memos

        Strategies for Memos

    Letter Basics, Parts, and Format

    Letter Tone

        Strategies for Letters in General

    Types of Letters

        Strategies for Inquiry Letters

        Strategies for Claim Letters

        Strategies for Sales Letters

        Strategies for Adjustment Letters

        Checklist for Memos and Letters

    Applications

Memos and letters are the most frequently used forms of workplace communication. Many memos and short letters are written directly into the body of an email message; for more formal situations, a memo or letter is sent via email as a PDF attachment, typically on company letterhead. You need to consider audience, purpose, formality, and workplace guidelines when choosing between an email on its own versus a memo or letter attachment or print copy. This chapter considers memos and letters, discussing these as stand-alone documents that might be delivered in print and digital formats. Chapter 18 (“Email and Text Messages”) builds on the concepts from this chapter but provides more detail about using email.

Memo Basics, Parts, and Format

    10.1 Explain the importance of a workplace memo and identify its parts and format.

“Memo” (short for “memorandum”) is derived from the same Latin roots as the words “memorize,” “remember,” and “remind.” Memos remind readers about important events, give directives, provide instructions and information, and make requests. Memos are typically distributed to employees within an organization, not to people outside the company. Memos are important in the workplace because they are easy to distribute via email or interoffice mail (print copies) and because they provide written documentation about an event or issue.

Informal memos and day-to-day exchanges are typically written as email ­messages. (See Chapter 18.) More formal memos would typically follow the strategies discussed in this chapter. These memos can then be delivered as print documents and/or as PDF attachments via email. (PDF is preferable to Word or other word processing formats because with PDF files, the formatting and layout can’t change.)
Parts and Format of Memos

A standard memo has the word “Memo” or “Memorandum” centered or set flush left at the top of the page and includes a header (flush to the left margin) identifying the recipient(s), sender, date, and subject. (Subject line can be set in italic for added emphasis.) If anyone is copied on the memo, use the abbreviation “cc” (for “courtesy copy”) followed by a colon and the name of each recipient. Because memos are often read rapidly by busy recipients, they should follow a consistent, predictable format. Figure 10.1 shows a standard memo with all parts labeled. Typically, you would double space between the header and the opening paragraph and between the paragraphs. For printed memos, top and bottom margins are typically set to 1 inch; left and right margins are typically set to anywhere from 1 inch to 1.25 inches.
Figure 10.1

A properly formatted memo
A figure illustrates a memo, along with comments.
Figure 10.1 Full Alternative Text

The body copy (main text portion) of a memo should focus on one topic. Content should be complete yet compact, providing all the information readers need but not going into unnecessary detail. Organize the body of your memo by starting with a short introduction, then writing a paragraph or two to address the main issue, and then concluding by suggesting a course of action or asking your readers to follow up.

Memo Tone

    10.2 Determine when to take a direct or indirect approach in a memo.

Memos are typically distributed in-house and circulated among colleagues, subordinates, and superiors. Memo topics often involve evaluations or recommendations about policies, procedures, and, ultimately, the people with whom you work. Because people are sensitive to criticism (even when it is merely implied) and often resistant to change, an ill-conceived memo tone can create problems. So, be particularly careful about your tone.

Achieving the right tone in your memos involves using some common sense. Put yourself in the shoes of your recipients and write accordingly. Be polite and avoid sounding bossy, condescending, and aggressive or deferential and passive. Don’t criticize, judge, or blame any individual or department. Don’t resort to griping, complaining, and other negative commentary. Try to emphasize the positive. Finally, approach difficult situations reasonably. Instead of taking an extreme stance or suggesting ideas that will never work, be practical and realistic.

The tone of a memo also comes across in the sequence in which you deliver the information. Depending on the sensitivity of your memo’s subject matter, you may want to take a direct or indirect approach. A direct approach (as in Figure 10.1) begins with the “bottom line” in the first sentence (and in the subject line) and then presents the details or analysis that support your case. An indirect approach lays out the details of the case over several sentences (and leaves the subject l ine vague) before delivering the bottom line later in the paragraph.

Readers generally prefer the direct approach because they want to know the bottom line without being told in advance how to feel about it. Assume, for example, that a company Payroll Manager has to announce to employees that their paychecks will be delayed by two days: This manager should take a direct approach, announcing the unpopular news in the subject line and in the opening sentence and then explaining the causes of the problem:

    MEMO

    To: All employees

    From: Meredith Rocteau, Payroll Manager

    Date: May 19, 20XX

    Subject: Delay in paychecks

    I regret to inform you that those employees paid by direct deposit will experience a two-day delay in receiving their paychecks.

    This delay is due to a virus that infiltrated the primary computer server for our payroll system. Although we hired consultants to identify the virus and clean out the server, the process took nearly 48 hours.

    We apologize for the inconvenience.

However, when you need to convey exceedingly bad news or make an unpopular request or recommendation (as in announcing a strict new policy or employee layoffs), you might consider an indirect approach; this way you can present your case and encourage readers to understand your position before announcing the unpopular bottom line. The danger of the indirect approach, though, is that you may come across as evasive.

    MEMO

    To: All employees

    From: J. Travis Southfield, Director of Human Resources

    Date: September 19, 20XX

    Subject: Difficult economic times

    Each employee of the AutoWorld family is a valued member, and each of you has played an important role in our company’s expansion over the past 10 years.

    Yet as you all know, times are difficult right now for the automobile industry. Sales are down, financing is hard to obtain, and consumers are holding back on major purchases.

    In order to keep the company solvent, we must consider all options. Therefore, I have been informed by our company president, John Creaswell, that we must downsize. We will begin with options for retirement packages, but please be prepared for the possibility that layoffs may follow.

    We will have more information for you at an all-hands meeting tomorrow.

Finally, a memo’s tone comes across in the way you handle its distribution. Use the appropriate delivery medium. If your topic is very short, timely, not overly formal and the message needs to reach everyone quickly, consider sending the memo as an email. But if your topic is more formal and more detailed, use an email to send a PDF attachment, and consider following up with a printed memo. Be careful about who receives the memo. Don’t send a memo to everyone at work when the content is only appropriate for a few, and don’t leave vital people off your distribution list.

Types of Memos

    10.3 Write an effective transmittal, summary/follow-up, or informational memo.

Memo format can also be used for distributing short reports, discussed in Chapter 15. However, for the purposes of this chapter, consider the following common and more basic types of memos. Whether sent on paper, as an email message, or as an attachment, the purpose of these memo types, and the suggestions for composing your memo’s content and message, would remain the same as discussed here. Formatting your message as an email can also follow the samples and guidelines in this chapter, although some email programs may not allow all of the visual features shown here. (See Chapter 18 for more examples of memos and other workplace documents sent as email.)
Transmittal Memo

A transmittal memo accompanies a package of materials, such as a long report, a manuscript, or a proposal. Its purpose is to signal that the information is being sent from one place to another (providing a paper trail), to introduce the material, and to explain what is enclosed. A transmittal memo may be as simple as a sentence or a paragraph with a bulleted list describing the package, as in Figure 10.2. Transmittal memos may also be used to send these materials as email attachments. Figure 10.2, for example, could also be used as a cover email, noting that the report is attached as a PDF file, available for download from the company file server, or available on a shared site such as Google Drive or Dropbox.
Figure 10.2

A transmittal memo
A figure illustrates a transmittal memo.
Figure 10.2 Full Alternative Text
Summary or Follow-up Memo

A summary or follow-up memo provides a written record of a meeting or conversation or just a topic during the meeting or conversation that was not resolved at the time. In addition to providing documentation that the meeting or conversation took place, summary and follow-up memos also ensure that each recipient has the same understanding of what was decided. Figure 10.3 shows a memo that performs both a summary and follow-up function. As noted with the transmittal memo, this summary and follow-up memo is very short and to the point and could easily be sent out as an email message.
Figure 10.3

A summary or follow-up memo
A figure illustrates a summary or follow-up memo.
Figure 10.3 Full Alternative Text
Informational Memo

Informational memos, such as the one shown in Figure 10.4, typically contain some type of announcement or update. For instance, you may receive a memo announcing the closure of a parking ramp over the holidays for repair or an upcoming awards ceremony on Friday. Given the timely nature of most informational memos, email is probably the best way to circulate this information, either as an email message or, for more formality, as a memo attachment on company letterhead.
Figure 10.4

An informational memo
A figure illustrates an informational memo.
Figure 10.4 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Memos

    Focus on one topic. If you need to address more than one topic, consider a format other than a memo (for instance, a report).

    Be brief. People expect memos that are short and to the point.

    Use the appropriate organizational format (direct or indirect). Consider the direct format when you need people to get the point quickly and the indirect format when you have something difficult to say that needs to be softened.

    Use white space, headings, and bullets. These features provide visual structure to your memo. But if your memo will be sent as the body of an email message, don’t get too fancy with formatting.

    Distribute to the right people. Whether you are sending the memo via email or on paper, be sure it reaches only those who need the information. At the same time, don’t leave out anyone who needs to read your message.

    Consider when to use an email, email with attachment, paper, or some combination. Most organizations have guidelines on their preferences. Email is suitable for short memos that need to be sent in a timely manner; email with an attachment is also quick but more formal; paper memos are perhaps the most formal of all, but increasingly, PDF attachments are preferred to actually printing and sending paper.

Letter Basics, Parts, and Format

    10.4 Describe the importance of a workplace letter and identify its parts and formats.

A well-crafted workplace letter conveys a formal, professional impression. It presents a reasoned, carefully constructed case and represents not only you but also your company or organization. Letters also serve as an official notice or record. Your signature on a letter certifies your approval of the message. Letters often serve as legal documents, and so precision is crucial. As noted above with memos, letters can be sent as attachments to an email or as print or even as both. For example, often when a person receives a job offer, the offer letter will come as a PDF attachment to an email, but then a print copy (along with other materials) will be sent through the mail.
Letter Parts and Formats

All letters contain various parts (date line, return address, signature line), which are formatted in a standard way. Companies and organizations have differing rules and guidelines for how they want letters formatted, when to use letterhead, and how to circulate letters both internally and to clients. Also, most word processing programs (like Word) offer letter templates; these templates will contain pre-set formatting ­options. Be careful when choosing a template, especially ones with fancy formatting and atypical margins or layouts. Use the guidelines and strategies in this chapter as a basis for your decisions.

The parts of a letter include the sender’s address/heading, date, inside address, salutation, body text, complimentary closing, and signature. In addition, a letter may include such optional parts as a company logo, typist’s initials, enclosure notation, and/or copy notation. Figure 10.5 shows a workplace letter with the standard parts (as well as optional typist’s initials and enclosure notation) labeled.
Figure 10.5

A workplace letter
A figure illustrates a workplace letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.5 Full Alternative Text
Sender’s Address

The sender’s address appears at the top of the letter in the form of either company letterhead or the sender’s mailing address. When you use your personal address, omit your name because that will appear below your signature at ­letter’s end. On the first line, include the full street address, and on the next line, include the city, state (abbreviated), country (if applicable), and postal code (ZIP code or other postal code).
Date

The date appears below the sender’s address. Spell out the month completely.
Inside Address

Use between two and four spaces between the date and the inside address (the address of the recipient). Include the courtesy title (“Mr.,” “Ms.,” “Dr.”) and the full name of the recipient on the first line; the person’s job title (if applicable) on the second line; the name of the company (if applicable) on the next line; the full street address on the next line; and the city, state, country (if applicable), and postal code on the last line.
Salutation

Double space between the inside address and the salutation. The salutation includes a greeting (usually “Dear”), followed by a courtesy title and the recipient’s last name. If you don’t know the person’s gender, use the full name (“Dear Sandy Martin:”). In a business letter, use a colon at the end of the salutation, not a comma.

Use an attention line when you write to an organization and do not know your recipient’s name but are directing the letter to a specific department or position. Place the attention line flush with the left margin two line spaces (returns) below the inside address (“Attention: Director of Research and Development”).

Typically, subject lines are used with memos, but if the recipient is not ­expecting your letter, a subject line can be a good way of catching a busy reader’s attention (“Subject: New patent for hybrid wheat crop”). Place the subject line below the inside address or attention line. You can italicize the subject to make it more prominent.
Body Text

Double space between the salutation and the body text; double space between body text paragraphs. The introductory paragraph should get right to the point. The middle paragraph(s) should support the introduction without straying off topic. The concluding paragraph should summarize and call for further action.
Complimentary Closing

Double space between the body text and the complimentary closing. Use a standard, businesslike closing such as “Sincerely,” “Respectfully,” or “Best regards.”
Signature

Type your name four lines beneath the complimentary closing and sign in the space between the complimentary closing and typed name.
Optional Parts

Most company letters will feature a preprinted logo at the very top of the page, providing the name and address of the company along with contact information. You may also need a typist notation: If someone other than the author types the letter, place the author’s capitalized initials first, followed by a slash and the typist’s lowercase initials. If anything was sent in the same envelope provide an enclosure notation: Use the abbreviation “Encl.” and briefly describe the contents. If anyone is copied on the letter, provide a copy notation. Use the abbreviation “cc” followed by a colon and the name of each recipient. Multiple notations would appear in this order: typist, enclosures, and then copy.

Although several formats are acceptable and your company may have its own, the most popular format for workplace letters is block format, illustrated by Figures 10.5 and 10.6.
Figure 10.6

Appropriate tone in conveying bad news

Letter Tone

    10.5 Understand the aspects of good letter tone, including maintaining a “you” attitude and using plain English.

Letters are typically written from one individual to another. But unlike a face-to-face conversation, video chat, or phone call between two people, letters lack important nonverbal cues (smiles, frowns, vocal expressions of agreement or disagreement) to help clarify what’s being said. These nonverbal cues in a phone call or a meeting allow you to modify your comments and your vocal tone.

When writing a letter, however, you can easily forget that a flesh-and-blood person will be reacting to what you say—or seem to say. You will receive no visual or auditory clues to alter what you write before you send the letter. As a result, the tone of a letter, like that of a memo, is especially important to get right.

To achieve an appropriate tone, consider the factors discussed below that affect the relationship between sender and recipient. As you read through this section, refer to Figure 10.6, which maintains an appropriate tone in conveying bad news.
Establishing and Maintaining a “You” Perspective

A letter displaying a “you” perspective puts the reader’s interest and feelings first. To convey a “you” perspective, put yourself in the place of the person who will read your correspondence, and ask yourself how this recipient will react to what you have written. Even a single word or sentence, carelessly chosen or phrased, can offend. Consider the following sentence in a letter to a customer:

    Our record keeping is very efficient and we have looked into it, so this is obviously your error.

This self-centered tone might be appropriate after numerous investigations into the customer’s complaint and failed attempts to communicate your company’s perspective to the customer, but in your initial correspondence it would be offensive. The example below shows a more considerate version. Instead of expressing only the writer’s point of view, this second version conveys respect for the reader’s viewpoint.

    Although my paperwork shows that you were charged correctly, I will investigate this matter ­immediately by checking my files against our records.

The “you” perspective is appropriate not only at the beginning of a letter but also throughout. Do not sign and send the letter until you are certain that the needs, wants, and feelings of your reader consistently get top billing, even when you simultaneously must assert your own perspective.
Being Polite and Tactful

If you must express criticism, do so in a way that conveys good will and trust in the recipient. Avoid the following type of expression:

    I am shocked that your company lacks the standards to design and manufacture an alarm clock that actually works.

Although a company representative would be required to write a polite and thoughtful response to the above complaint, he or she might be inclined to look closely at the clock’s warranty, offer only the most basic reimbursement, and not seek the customer’s future business via an incentive.

In contrast, a polite and thoughtful letter might yield a full refund, a brand-new replacement, or an attractive incentive:

    Although your clock worked reliably for several months, one of the internal mechanisms ­recently malfunctioned. I would appreciate your contacting me about an exchange or refund.

Using Plain English

Avoid the stuffy, puffed-up phrases some writers think they need to make their communications sound important. Even though a letter is more formal than a memo or an email, plain English can still get your point across. For example, consider the following closing section to an inquiry letter asking for help:

    Humbly thanking you in anticipation of your kind assistance, I remain

    Faithfully yours,

The reader of this letter might feel spoken down to and decide not to respond. However, in this revised version, the reader would likely perceive the writer as a straight-talking equal and be more inclined to follow up:

    I would greatly appreciate any help you could offer me.

    Best wishes,

Here are a few stuffy phrasings, with clearer, more direct translations:
Stuffy, unclear 	Clear and direct
As per your request 	As you requested
Contingent upon receipt of 	As soon as we receive
Due to the fact that 	Because

Be natural. Write as you would speak in a classroom or office: professionally and respectfully but clearly and directly.
Considering the Needs of International Readers

In the global marketplace, you will often find that you need to communicate with readers outside the United States. In many of these settings, formality may be highly valued, and so at some point, instead of just using email, you may need to write a formal letter. Some of your readers may speak English as a first language. To ensure your letter is appropriate for an international reader, avoid being overly informal, use plain English, and avoid idiomatic expressions such as “in the ball park” or “under the weather.”
Being Direct or Indirect

During your career, you will have to write letters that convey bad or unwelcome news. For example, you may have to say no to customers, employees, and job applicants. You may have to make difficult requests, such as asking employees to accept higher medical insurance premiums or seeking an interview with a beleaguered official. You may have to notify consumers or shareholders about accidents or product recalls. You may have to apologize for errors—and so on. In each instance, you will have to decide whether to build your case first (indirect approach) or get right to the point (direct approach).

Try to anticipate your readers’ reaction. Generally speaking, when you have good news use the direct approach; readers will appreciate your getting right to the point. When presenting bad news, you may prefer the indirect approach; by presenting your rationale beforehand, you give readers the chance to adjust to the bad news.
Strategies
for Letters in General

    Determine whether the situation calls for a letter, memo, or email. Letters are the most formal of these three choices.

    Use an appropriate letter format and include all the required parts. Unless your organization has its own guidelines, use the block format and the parts discussed earlier.

    Place the reader’s needs first. Always write from the “you” perspective, putting yourself in your reader’s place.

    Decide on the direct or indirect approach. Generally speaking, take the direct approach for good news and the indirect approach for bad news.

    Maintain a courteous, professional tone. A professional tone creates goodwill and is more effective in the long run.

    Avoid stuffy language. Use plain English, no matter how formal or important the letter. Stuffy language only comes across as phony.

    Keep international readers in mind. Don’t assume every letter you write is directed at a recipient whose first language is English.

    Use PDF for digital delivery. If your letter will be sent as an email attachment, use PDF rather than a word processing format for your attachment. (PDF will retain the formatting and layout more precisely and can’t be edited or modified as easily.)
    
Types of Letters

    10.6 Write an effective inquiry, claim, sales, or adjustment letter.

There are many types of business letters. Among the most common types you can expect to write on the job are inquiry letters, claim letters, sales letters, and adjustment letters.
Inquiry Letters

Inquiry letters ask questions and request a reply. They may be solicited (in response to an advertisement or announcement) or unsolicited (to request some type of information you need for your job). For example, a manager at a computer repair company might write a solicited inquiry to a manufacturer that offers free troubleshooting guides for repair specialists. If there has been no such advertised offer, the manager might write an unsolicited inquiry to the same company asking if any troubleshooting information is available.

In a solicited inquiry, be brief and make sure to reference the advertisement, social media post, or other announcement that prompted you to write. In an unsolicited inquiry, you are asking a busy person to read your letter, consider your request, collect the information, and write a response. Therefore, keep your request reasonable and state the purpose clearly and concisely. Express your appreciation. Avoid long, involved inquiries that are unlikely to be answered.

Figure 10.7 is an example of an unsolicited letter requesting information. Research consultant Alan Greene is preparing a report on the feasibility of harnessing solar energy for home heating in Alaska. After learning that a nonprofit research group has been experimenting with solar applications, Alan decides to write for details. Notice how Greene tries to make the respondent’s task as easy as possible. If this letter were sent as an attachment to an email, Greene could set up a link to an online survey or form, making the reader’s task even easier.
Figure 10.7

An unsolicited inquiry letter
A figure illustrates an unsolicited inquiry letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.7 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Inquiry Letters

    Don’t wait until the last minute. Provide ample time for a response.

    Whenever possible, write to a specific person. If you need the name, call the organization and ask to whom you should address your inquiry.

    Do your homework to ask the right questions. A vague request such as “Please send me your data on . . .” is likely to be ignored. Don’t ask questions for which the answers are readily available elsewhere.

    Explain who you are and how the information will be used. If you appear to be from a competing company, your request will likely be ignored. But in other situations, you still need to explain what you plan to do with the requested data.

    Write specific questions that are easy to understand and answer. If you have multiple questions, put them in a numbered list to increase your chances of getting all the information you want.

    Provide alternate contact information. If you can also be reached by email or phone, provide that information.

    Include a stamped, self-addressed envelope or provide an online option, such as a clickable survey or form. These gestures will increase the likelihood of a response.

    Say thank you and offer to follow up. Even if you said it at the beginning, say thank you again at the end. Offer to send a copy of the document in which you plan to use the information, if appropriate.

Claim Letters

In the workplace, things do not always run smoothly. Sometimes people make ­mistakes, systems break down, or companies make promises that can’t be kept. Claim (or complaint) letters request adjustments for defective goods or poor services, or they complain about unfair treatment or the like. Such letters fall into two categories: routine claims and arguable claims. Each calls for a different approach. Routine claims typically take a direct approach because the customer’s claim is not debatable. Arguable claims present more of a persuasive challenge because they convey unwelcome news and are open to interpretation; arguable claims, therefore, typically take an indirect approach.

Figure 10.8 shows a routine claim letter. Writer Jeffrey Ryder does not ask whether the firm will honor his claim; he assumes that it will and asks directly how to return his defective skis for repair. Notice that, in place of a salutation, an attention line directs the claim to the appropriate department, while a subject line (and its reemphasis in the first sentence) makes clear the nature of the claim.
Figure 10.8

A routine claim letter
A figure illustrates a routine claim letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.8 Full Alternative Text

Figure 10.9 shows an arguable claim letter. Because the reply may not necessarily be in her favor, writer Sandra Alvarez uses a tactful and reasonable tone and an indirect approach to present her argument. Although she is courteous, she is also somewhat forceful to reflect her insistence on an acceptable adjustment. For example, the attention line creates an immediate businesslike tone.
Figure 10.9

An arguable claim letter
A figure illustrates an arguable claim letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.9 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Claim Letters

    Routine claim letters

        Use a direct approach. Describe the request or problem; explain the problem clearly; close courteously, restating the action you request.

        Be polite and reasonable. Your goal is not to sound off but to achieve results: a refund, a replacement, or an apology. Press your claim objectively yet firmly by explaining it clearly and by stipulating the reasonable action that will satisfy you. Do not insult the reader or revile the company.

        Provide enough detail to clarify the basis for your claim. Explain the specific defect. Identify the faulty item clearly, giving serial and model numbers and date and place of purchase.

        Conclude by expressing goodwill and confidence in the company’s integrity. Do not make threats or create animosity.

    Arguable claim letters

        Use an indirect approach. People are more likely to respond favorably after reading your explanation. Begin with a neutral statement both parties can agree to—but that also serves as the basis for your request.

        Once you’ve established agreement, explain and support your claim. Include enough information for a fair evaluation: date and place of purchase, order number, dates of previous letters or calls, and background.

        Conclude by requesting a specific action. Be polite but assertive in how you make your request.

Sales Letters

Sales letters are written to persuade a current or potential customer to buy a ­company’s product or try its services. Because people are bombarded by sales ­messages—in magazines, on billboards, on television, on Facebook, on online shopping and other sites—your letter must be genuinely persuasive and must get to the point quickly. First, engage the reader immediately with an attention-­grabbing statement or an intriguing question. Next, describe clearly and concisely the product or ­service you offer and explain its appeal. Finally, conclude by requesting immediate action.

In the letter in Figure 10.10, restaurant owner Jimmy Lekkas opens with an ­attention-grabbing question that is hard to ignore and has universal appeal: good food, for free, right in the neighborhood. He then makes his case by explaining the history of his restaurant (which provides immediate credibility) and offering vivid descriptions of the food. He closes by asking readers to take action by a specific date.
Figure 10.10

A sales letter
A figure illustrates a sales letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.10 Full Alternative Text

Strategies
for Sales Letters

    Begin with a question or other attention-grabbing statement. 

    Get to the point. People resist reading long opening passages, especially if the message is unsolicited.

    Spell out the benefits for the recipients. Answer this implied question: “What do I stand to gain from this?”

    Persuade with facts and with appeals to the senses. Facts (such as the history of your company) appeal to logic. Graphic descriptions (such as the colors of your new cars or the types of food you offer) appeal to a different part of the brain—the emotions. Use both.

    Tell the truth. Despite your desire to sell something, it is unethical to lie, distort, exaggerate, or underestimate to make the sale.

    Close by asking readers to take action. Either ask for some reasonable action (such as “like us on Facebook”) or offer an incentive (such as a free sample) to encourage follow up.

Adjustment Letters

Adjustment letters are written in response to a claim letter from a customer. Even though most people never make formal complaints or follow up on warranties or product guarantees, companies generally will make a requested adjustment that seems reasonable.

Rather than quibbling over questionable claims, companies usually honor the request and show how much they appreciate the customer, as in Figure 10.11. In this example, writer Jane Duval apologizes graciously for a mistake. She omits an explanation because the error is obvious: Someone sent the wrong software. Once the reader has the information and apology, Duval shifts attention to a positive feature: the gift certificate. Note the “you” perspective and friendly tone.
Figure 10.11

A positive adjustment letter
A figure illustrates a positive adjustment letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.11 Full Alternative Text

Of course, if a claim is unreasonable or unjustified, the recipient usually will refuse the request. In refusing to grant a refund for a 10-speed bicycle, company representative Anna Jenkins faces a delicate balance (Figure 10.12). On the one hand, she must explain why she cannot grant the customer’s request; on the other hand, she must be diplomatic in how she asserts that the customer is mistaken. Although Mrs. Gower may not be pleased by the explanation, it is thorough and reasonable.
Figure 10.12

A negative adjustment letter
A figure illustrates a negative adjustment letter, along with comments.
Figure 10.12 Full Alternative Text
Strategies
for Adjustment Letters

    If you need to apologize, do so immediately and in active voice. Don’t say “An error was made . . .”; instead, say “We are sorry we made an error . . .”

    Be polite and professional. Even if you must say no to a request, you can do so respectfully.

    Use passive voice if you want to avoid sounding accusatory. If your customer made a mistake in assembling the device, you could say “The wrong bolts were used” rather than “You used the wrong bolts.”

    If appropriate, offer an incentive. You can create a lot of goodwill if you reach out with even a small gift certificate or in-store credit.

    Close on a positive note. Thank the person for writing and for being a customer.

Checklist
for Memos and Letters
Memo

    Does my memo contain all the necessary parts (To, From, Date, Subject, body copy)?

    Is the text of my memo clear and direct?

    Does my memo follow a standard format, beginning with an introductory paragraph, explaining my points in the body of the memo, then ending with a short conclusion?

    Is the tone of my memo professional and polite?

    Have I considered whether to take a direct or an indirect approach?

    Does my memo focus on one topic?

    Is my memo directed at the right people?

    Have I considered whether the memo is more suitable to the body of an email, as an email attachment, or as a paper memo (or some combination)?

Letter

    Does my letter contain all the necessary parts (sender’s address, date, inside address, salutation/attention line, body text, closing signature)?

    Is the tone of my letter professional, polite, and appropriately formal?

    Have I considered whether to take a direct or an indirect approach?

    Have I put my reader’s interests first (the “you” perspective)?

    If making a difficult request, am I being tactful yet clear about what I want?

    Am I writing in clear language?

    Will my letter be delivered on paper via the mail service or as an email attachment, or both?

Applications
General Application

Write a memo as the sales director of a company to in-house sales department employees and to sales representatives. Announce and outline a new dress code policy and diplomatically explain why the policy is more strict for the sales reps. Remember to keep an informal but professional tone, format the memo properly, and keep it brief but complete. Decide whether to send the memo as the body of an email message or as a PDF email attachment (you can skip ahead to Chapter 18 for more ideas about email and memos).
Team Applications

    In groups of two or three, assume you are co-owners of a condominium complex that has been invaded by carpenter ants. Have a meeting to discuss your plans to find a way to eliminate the ants, using an insecticide proven to be nontoxic to humans. Ask each team member to write a follow-up memo that ­summarizes the meeting and recommends next steps for each team member to take. Compare memos and discuss the decisions each person made for how to organize and structure the memo.

    Working in groups, respond to the following scenario. Appoint one group member to present the letter in class.

    Luke Harrington wants a $1,200 refund for four Douglas fir trees that have died since your workers planted them in his yard two years ago. Because you guarantee your transplants for three years, he wants his money returned. After checking Harrington’s contract, you recall his problem: You wouldn’t guarantee the five Douglas firs he ordered because he wanted them planted in a wet, marshy area, and Douglas firs need well-drained soil. A check of Harrington’s lot confirms that four trees planted in the wet area have died of root rot. Write to him, reminding him of the contract and refusing the adjustment. As you did two years ago, suggest that he plant balsam firs in the wet area. Although balsam needles are slightly darker than the Douglas firs’, both trees have the shape he wants. The balsams would retain the symmetry of his tree line. Harrington’s address: 921 Daisy Lane, Churchill, MO 61516.

Global Application

Interview a person whose work takes him or her to one or more countries outside the United States. Ask that person to describe the way letters are used for international communication and whether any special issues involving grammar, forms of address, direct or indirect organizational patterns, or other features make letter writing different when addressing international audiences.
Digital and Social Media Application

Word processing programs (Microsoft Word, Google Docs, Apple Pages) offer a variety of templates for writing letters. Templates can help you get started; templates should be used wisely, however, because instead of thinking for yourself about the audience, purpose, and appropriate organizational pattern and language usage, you may end up letting the template do the thinking. Look at the various templates available in your word processing program, and make a list of ways in which the template may or may not work for your purposes. Compare the template features with those described in this chapter.
