Chapter 20 Social Media
A figure shows a mobile phone screen showing a display of icons for different applications.
Learning Objectives

    20.1 Understand audience and purpose considerations when using social media.

    20.2 Discuss the workplace uses of various popular social media.

    20.3 Identify credibility and legal issues related to using social media on the job.

Chapter Outline

    Considering Audience and Purpose 357

    Social Media in Technical and Workplace Communication

    Credibility and Legal Issues

        Strategies for Social Media

        Checklist for Social Media

    Applications
    
Considering Audience and Purpose

    20.1 Understand audience and purpose considerations when using social media.

Most organizations maintain a social media site to highlight or promote a particular product or service or to provide updates and keep in touch with customers. Initially, a social media site such as Facebook may be designed with one particular audience in mind. But when set up as open to the public, Facebook and other social media sites can be viewed by thousands (if not more) people. So, your audience and purpose may soon be far more expansive than originally envisioned. For example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that its initial Facebook page was set up for an audience interested in health and safety updates. But as interest grew, the organization had to expand its Facebook presence, eventually supporting “multiple Facebook profiles connecting users with information on a range of CDC health and safety topics” (“CDC Social Media Guidelines,” 1).

For most large organizations, it has become imperative not only to have a social media presence but also to have a social media policy. From government agencies to colleges and universities to businesses, social media policies describe everything from appropriate use of visuals to the tone, style, and word count best suited when writing for that organization’s social media site. Simon Fraser University (see Figure 20.1), for example, suggests limiting a Facebook post to 35 words or less and keeping voice and tone professional and consistent, no matter how many people are maintaining and writing for the site (Simon Fraser University).
Figure 20.1

A sample social media policy
A figure shows a sample social media policy.

Source: Courtesy of Simon Fraser University. Used with permission.
Figure 20.1 Full Alternative Text
Audience as Contributor

External audience members can be important contributors to social media sites. For instance, many companies encourage customers to provide feedback via a customer review site, such as Yelp or TripAdvisor. Increasingly, product instructions and user documentation (see Chapter 13) are posted online, with a comment section available so readers can report on or update the documentation if they notice problems or errors. When audience members become contributors, there are more chances to collect important information. But there is also a greater need for fact-checking.

As one technical communication expert noted:

    The challenge for the professional communicator is to contribute at a higher level, welcoming community involvement and building on it. For the technical writer, that may mean doing less writing and more curating of content—for example, identifying and promoting the best wiki contributions, correcting errors, clarifying unclear language, adding illustrations, and improving organization. (Carr)

As discussed previously, social media managers (often trained in technical communication) play an important role in encouraging community participation and checking the accuracy of what gets posted.
Personal versus Workplace Uses of Social Media

Social media posts in workplace settings need to adhere to the kind of guidelines discussed throughout this text: words and images should be professional, concise, accurate, and clear. Yet social media is a world where professional and personal lives often intersect. Your personal Facebook page, Twitter, or Instagram account may contain images and posts that are suitable for friends and family: photos of a party or vacation; political opinions; off-the-cuff remarks about a news item or a new technology. When writing these posts as a student and an individual, you probably envision your audience as only those people you have chosen to see your posts (your friends or a custom list).

But it is important to keep in mind that social media posts can travel far beyond your initial audience, and they can last for years. For example, many people have come to regret a Facebook posting or a tweet when it comes time for a job interview. Remember that although you may control your “friends list,” it is very easy for people with enough time on their hands (and some easy-to-use software) to dig through your online history and compile a digital profile of you and your personal opinions and habits.

Social Media in Technical and Workplace Communication

    20.2 Discuss the workplace uses of various popular social media.

The most common social media sites for workplace communication are discussed below.
Customer Review Sites

For companies such as restaurants, hotels, and entertainment venues, word of mouth can be the most important—or the most damaging—form of advertising. Customer review sites (Yelp and TripAdvisor are two of the most popular) allow registered members to post feedback in the form of short reviews. People can also rate the business using a number of stars. In some cases, companies are able to write a follow-up response, which can be especially important if the customer review is not favorable.
Facebook

As previously mentioned, Facebook is used by government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and companies both large and small, across the United States and, increasingly, around the globe. Facebook provides a way to keep readers informed about news, updates, products and services, and so forth. Like customer review sites, Facebook also allows readers to participate on the site, posting questions and comments. Social media directors and others who manage the site often need to sift through these comments to ensure accuracy and keep “flame wars” and negative information to a minimum.
Google+

Google+ is a suite of applications that includes email, document collaboration and sharing, and a network of friends and workplace associates that you can use to stay in touch and share information. Google+ allows you to create special lists of people you want to communicate with: for example, business associates, friends, acquaintances, and so on. In this way, you can customize the audience for your message. Google+ also offers real-time ways to interact with your audience, such as Google Hangouts and Google Chat.
Instagram

Instagram is an app that features the use of photos and other visuals. Instagram was originally developed as a quick and easy phone-based app for people to share photos with friends, but its use has expanded as organizations notice Instagram’s potential to reach customers. Businesses with a focus on visual information in particular use Instagram to share photos and coupons, promote new product lines or sales, and connect with existing and new customers.
LinkedIn and Other Job Sites

Social networking sites can help you stay connected, discover job openings, and advertise yourself. One popular professional networking site is LinkedIn (see Figure 20.2). On this and similar sites, you can keep your profile (work experience, references, and so forth) updated and make this profile available to professional contacts, potential employers, and job recruiters. Importantly, you can connect with former colleagues and classmates. These people are often your best bet for learning about job openings. Don’t be shy about contacting people you don’t know firsthand but with whom you have some mutual connection through a third party (a former coworker, for example).
Figure 20.2

LinkedIn, a Professional Networking Site
A figure shows a zoomed-in window screen. The focus is on the address bar showing www.linkedin.com. Below is the web page with the Linkedin logo and pertaining tabs.

To keep your personal and professional contexts somewhat separate, encourage your friends and family to connect with you on Facebook, but let colleagues (both current and former) know that for professional connections, you prefer to stay in touch via LinkedIn.

Twitter is also a popular tool for employment-related communication. Many companies use Twitter to announce job openings. By using Twitter, companies can reach hundreds of potential employees quickly and inexpensively. People can click on a link that takes them to the job posting or other information.
Twitter

As mentioned, Twitter can be used for employment information. Twitter also provides real-time postings and updates in a concise format. Individuals as well as companies, government agencies, and other organizations maintain Twitter feeds to keep friends, business associates, customers, and citizens informed and updated. Called “tweets,” the form of writing on Twitter is concise, with a limit of 280 characters (in November 2017, the company increased the number of characters from 140 to 280). A tweet may contain a Web address that people can click on for more information.

Twitter can be especially effective in situations that require a rapid response. For example, when a major weather event (such as a hurricane or blizzard) interrupts air travel, airlines become inundated with calls from customers. A Twitter feed can be a very effective method for providing customers with up-to-date information, by the minute, on flight cancellations, contingency plans, and resources for more information. See Figure 20.3—note the short, compact, informational tweets that are written with a professional, friendly tone. Those customers who are stuck at the airport or at home wondering about the flight situation can stay tuned via their phone for the latest status update.
Figure 20.3

Twitter feed during a weather emergency
A figure shows Twitter feeds during a weather emergency.
Figure 20.3 Full Alternative Text
YouTube

For workplace communication, YouTube offers an easy-to-access site where customers can watch videos that help explain a concept or demonstrate how to perform a task. Many organizations create video instructions in addition to print or online user guides. Viewers can post comments and ideas to the video’s Web page; these comments provide valuable feedback on the product or idea being featured and give audience members a chance to offer their input directly to the company or organization.
Other Popular Social Media Sites

In addition to the sites mentioned above, organizations are also turning their attention to Reddit, Tumblr, and Pinterest. These sites, and other social media apps just on the horizon, illustrate the power of social media to reach audiences, especially for marketing and information-sharing purposes, with social media managers crafting information suitable for each platform. Icons are usually seen on the organization’s main Web site, allowing users to click and join one of these social media feeds.




Credibility and Legal Issues

    20.3 Identify credibility and legal issues related to using social media on the job.

Social media platforms provide powerful ways to influence human understanding. For instance, consider how social media posts can affect perceptions of credibility, truth, and accuracy. We all know of situations where a Facebook post or tweet has gone viral, circulating thousands (if not more) times, only to be discovered later to be untrue, inaccurate, or distorted.

Two factors contribute to this phenomenon. First, social media posts are typically shared by others from within a trusted network, for example, friends, family members, valued colleagues, and trusted organizations. As humans, we tend to view as credible what we hear from trusted sources. Second, social media posts combine visuals and text in short, speedy bursts. The visuals in particular play an important role in our response: Images are processed quickly and appeal to the more primitive areas of our brains—the “fight or flight” parts that want to respond (and repost) quickly. Social media images might be shared hundreds, thousands, or even more times, across numerous platforms, reinforcing their messages as the images are repeated over and over.

Because of these features, social media can be highly effective for technical and workplace communication, but the potential for problems also looms large. For example, if companies make a mistake with a social media post (say, an inaccurate claim about a product or an incorrect interpretation about a disease epidemic or medication recall), tens of thousands of Facebook, Twitter, and Yelp users can turn the mistake into a public relations nightmare (Baker 48–50) or even worse, a major health and safety situation. Or, consider the idea of “stealth marketing,” in which people who publish supposedly objective product reviews fail to disclose the free merchandise or cash payments they received for their flattering portrayals. These reviews may circulate on social media appearing to be objective, factual discussions when in fact they are a form of marketing hidden behind a credible looking and sounding post.

In addition to credibility concerns, it is important to consider workplace uses of social media in relation to privacy and other legal matters. Most social media sites have privacy policies, but these documents are often difficult to find on the site and are dense and hard to understand. An accessible and easy-to-read privacy policy is important to help inform readers of what data the site is collecting and how the site uses this data.

Employees within the organization must maintain a professional and appropriate tone and approach when posting. Those who discuss proprietary matters or post defamatory comments on social media can face serious legal consequences—not to mention job termination. Also, like email, social media sites create the potential for violations of copyright and confidentiality (see Chapter 18 for more on email and copyright).

To reinforce legal and other standards, organizations such as IBM, the American Red Cross, Dell, Intel, and many others have created social media guidelines and policies. Recognizing the particular challenge of protecting patient privacy, the American Nurses Association and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing created special guidelines on social media and networking specific for nurses (“News Release”). These types of guidelines and policies will become increasingly important as new social media apps come online and businesses and organizations work to adapt to the changing technological environments.
Strategies
for Social Media

    Write with a friendly yet professional tone. It’s always nice to be friendly, but a professional tone will make your message more credible.

    Keep ideas focused and specific. Social media let you narrow your message down to a targeted audience (say, customers who use a specific model of laptop).

    Be discreet about what you post. When posting to your personal Facebook or other page, remember to omit private or potentially damaging information. It may be fun to tell your friends how many parties you’ve attended, but when you apply for a job, this information may come back to haunt you.

    Keep global readers in mind. Social media can typically be viewed by readers from across many countries and cultures. Keep the content accessible to a wide audience (see Chapter 1 for more on global audiences).

    Keep credibility and accuracy in mind. Remember: People tend to trust what they already believe or what comes from trusted networks of friends and colleagues. Make sure your post is accurate and true, and include visuals that are appropriate for the topic but don’t exaggerate or over-dramatize the point.

    Have a social media policy. No matter the size of your organization, having clear, accessible social media guidelines will ensure that social media communication is professional and consistent in content, tone, and style.

    Choose the most appropriate app for your message. A short tweet can reach thousands of readers quickly, but you’ll need a link to another site (your organization’s Web site, for example) to provide readers with more detailed information. Keep an eye out for new social media apps and consider how these different platforms can best support your organization’s mission.

Checklist
for Social Media

    When creating a social media site for a company or organization, have I written content and used images that are professional and appropriate?

    When creating a social media site for myself, have I used the right site for the right purpose (e.g., LinkedIn for professional networking and job hunting)?

    For personal use, does the information I’ve posted portray me in a way that I would want a potential employer to see?

    For a workplace social media post, is my writing friendly yet professional in tone?

    Have I kept ideas focused and specific?

    For tweets that refer to a longer topic, have I included a link for more information?

    Have I used language and images appropriate for a global audience?

    Does my post or tweet adhere to the company’s social media policy?

    Have I considered issues about credibility and legal matters (such as privacy and confidentiality)?

Applications
General Application

Explore several job-related social media sites (e.g., LinkedIn, Ryze, Spoke). What are the differences among these sites? For instance, all may offer to help you see your network of professional contacts, but does one of these sites offer a better visual display of connections? Do all of these sites let you upload your resume and provide a list of references? If you have an account with any of these, look at your profile to see how well it reflects your current experience and career goals. Make a list of five to six qualities that students should consider when writing and posting to professional networking sites.
Team Application

Work with a partner to look at your Facebook page and your partner’s Facebook page. Imagine that you are managers interested in hiring new college students for a trainee position in your department. What do these Facebook pages tell you about these potential employees? What aspects of Facebook pages—pictures, text, connections—should college students consider during their transition from student to potential employee? Write a short summary of your thoughts, and share it with the class.
Global Application

Customer review sites are written and read by people around the globe. If you are a social media manager for a company, you’ll need to read these reviews and write professional, thoughtful responses. Look up a service, restaurant, hotel, or other business using Yelp or TripAdvisor. Find one that has a mix of reviews (some good, some not so good). Did someone from the company write a response? If so, is it appropriate in tone and style for a global audience? Keeping a global audience in mind, write your own response to one or several of these (do not post it), and discuss it with a group of three to four students.
Digital and Social Media Application

Go online and search for the phrase “social media policy” and “social media guidelines.” See what you can find from organizations of various sizes and content areas. (Hint: Start with your own college or university to see what they came up with). Compare the policies and guidelines you found with the posts you found on the customer review site (global application). Draft a set of social media guidelines that you think would be most effective for this customer review site (if the site has an existing policy or guidelines, see if you can add anything important based on your searches). Pay special attention to issues of word choice, tone, and privacy.
