Chapter 21 Oral Presentations and Video Conferencing
A photo shows a conference room with a woman writing something on a white board, while other people seated around a table in front of her look at it.
Learning Objectives

    21.1 Analyze the audience and purpose of an oral presentation.

    21.2 Identify the five types of oral presentations.

    21.3 Organize an oral presentation using an introduction–body– conclusion structure.

    21.4 Prepare for an oral presentation by carefully considering various factors.

    21.5 Use presentation software effectively.

    21.6 Understand the workplace uses of video conferencing.

    21.7 Deliver a confident, professional oral presentation.

Chapter Outline

    Audience and Purpose of Oral Presentations

    Types of Oral Presentations

    Parts of Oral Presentations

    Preparing Oral Presentations

        Strategies for Preparing Oral Presentations

    Using Presentation Software

    Video Conferencing

        Strategies for Using Presentation Software and Video Conferencing

    Delivering Oral Presentations

        Strategies for Delivering Oral Presentations

        Checklist for Oral Presentations

    Applications
    
Audience and Purpose of Oral Presentations

    21.1 Analyze the audience and purpose of an oral presentation.

Analyzing audience and purpose is a slightly different proposition when speaking rather than writing. Therefore, use the amended version of the Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet provided in Figure 21.1.
Figure 21.1

Audience and purpose profile sheet for an oral presentation
A figure shows an audience and purpose profile sheet for an oral presentation.
Figure 21.1 Full Alternative Text

Do all you can to find out exactly who will be attending your presentation. Determine their roles within the organization. Learn about their attitudes and personal experiences regarding your subject. For example, managers may focus on the bottom line, while engineers may care more about the difficulties involved in the project you are proposing. Oral presentations are often delivered to a mixed group, so consider the attitudes of the group as a whole and speak to the needs of various factions. The group is also likely to consist of people from various cultural and linguistic backgrounds, so be sure to account for these differences.

Determine whether your purpose is to inform, instruct, or persuade. Does your audience simply need some vital information? If so, provide enough detail and explanation for people to understand the information clearly. Will they use your information to perform a task? If so, focus on the task itself and send background and other information via email after the presentation. Is your goal to influence your audience’s thinking or sell something? If so, be sure to have all the specifications, costs, and other data that will help audience members make their decision. In short, knowing clearly what you wish to accomplish will help you formulate a definite plan for your presentation.

Types of Oral Presentations

    21.2 Identify the five types of oral presentations.

Your primary purpose will determine the type of presentation required: an informative presentation, a training presentation, a persuasive presentation, an action plan presentation, or a sales presentation.
Informative Presentations

Informative presentations are often given at conferences, product update meetings, briefings, or class lectures. Your goal is to be as impartial as possible and to provide the best information you can locate. If your primary purpose is informative, observe these criteria:

    Keep the title of the presentation clear and factual.

    Stipulate at the outset that your purpose is simply to provide information.

    Be clear about your sources of information.

Training Presentations

Training (or instructional) presentations can cover such topics as how to ensure on-the-job safety, how to use a specific software application, or how to exit a capsized kayak. Some technical communicators specialize in giving training presentations. If your primary purpose is instructional, follow these guidelines:

    Use a title that indicates the training purpose of the presentation.

    Provide an overview of the learning outcomes—what participants can expect to learn from the presentation.

    Create slides or a handout that participants can reference later when they are trying to perform the task(s) on their own.

Persuasive Presentations

To influence people’s thinking, give a persuasive presentation. For example, an engineer at a nuclear power plant may wish to persuade her peers that a standard procedure is unsafe and should be changed. In a persuasive situation, be sure to perform adequate research so you are well informed on all sides of the issue. If your primary purpose is persuasive, follow these guidelines:

    Be clear from the start that you are promoting a point of view.

    Use research and visual data (charts, graphs, etc.) to support your stance.

    Consider and address counterarguments in advance (“Some might say this approach won’t work, but here is why it will”), and be prepared to take questions that challenge your point of view.

Action Plan Presentations

To get something done, give an action plan presentation. For example, if you wanted your company to address a design flaw in one of its products, you would give a presentation that outlined the problem, presented a specific solution, and encouraged listeners to implement the solution. If your primary purpose is to evoke action, follow these guidelines:

    Be clear up front about your purpose (“My primary purpose today is to ask you to act on this matter”).

    Present the research to back up the need for your plan.

    Show that you have considered other plans but that yours is most effective.

    In closing, restate what you want your audience to do.

Sales Presentations

Technical sales presentations need to be well researched. (At many high-tech companies, technical sales representatives are often scientists or engineers who understand the product’s complexities and are good communicators). If your primary purpose is to sell something, observe these criteria:

    Let the facts tell the story. Use examples to illustrate why your product or service is the right one.

    Know your product or service—and those of your competitors—inside and out. Thorough knowledge and a well-researched competitive analysis will make your presentation that much more persuasive.

    Display sincere interest in the needs and concerns of your customers.

    Provide plenty of time for questions. You may think you have made an airtight case, but you will need extra face-to-face time to field questions and convince skeptical audience members.
    
Parts of Oral Presentations

    21.3 Organize an oral presentation using an introduction–body–conclusion structure.

Like most technical documents, oral presentations should follow an introduction–body–conclusion structure.
Introduction

For introducing most presentations, pay attention to three main tasks:

    Capture your audience’s attention by telling a quick story, asking a question, or relating your topic to a current event or to something else the audience cares about.

    Establish your credibility by stating your credentials or explaining where you obtained your information.

    Preview your presentation by listing the main points and the overall conclusion.

An effective introduction might sound like this:

    How many times have you searched for medical information online, only to find that after hours of looking, you can’t tell the difference between credible and questionable information? If you’re like most Americans polled in a recent survey, you may feel that you are wasting time when it comes to online medical information. My name is Travis Armstrong, and I’ve been researching this topic for some time. Today, I’d like to share my findings with you by covering three main points: how to search for medical information, how to separate good information from bad, and how to contribute to medical discussions online.

Body

Readers who get confused or want to know the scope of a print document can look back at the headings, table of contents, or previous pages. But oral presentations have no such features. To make your presentation easy to follow, structure the material into small chunks. To signal that you are moving from one main point to another, use transition statements such as, “Now that I’ve explained how to separate good information from bad, let me suggest how you can contribute to medical discussions on the Internet.”
Conclusion

Your conclusion should return full circle to your introduction. Remind your audience of the big picture, restate the main points you’ve just covered, and leave listeners with some final advice or tips for locating more information. You can also distribute handouts at this time.

Preparing Oral Presentations

    21.4 Prepare for an oral presentation by carefully considering various factors.

Preparing an oral presentation is a step-by-step process that requires research, planning, and rehearsal.
Research and Connect the Topic to Your Audience

Be prepared to support each assertion, opinion, conclusion, and recommendation with solid evidence. Begin gathering material well ahead of time. Use recognized sources, such as newspaper articles, peer-reviewed journals, industry fact sheets, government documents, and interviews. Check your facts for accuracy. If you will be using presentation software or handouts, you will need to indicate your information sources on the slides or handouts (typically as footnotes at the bottom of the slide or page). Keep track of your sources.

Even the most well-researched presentation won’t be effective unless the speaker connects the topic to the interests, backgrounds, and technical levels of the audience. Look back at your Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet, and think about ways you can connect to ideas already familiar to your audience.
Create an Outline or Storyboard

If your presentation is a spoken version of a written report, you can start with the outline of your written report, but modified for a presentation (Figure 21.2). Otherwise, organize your ideas in terms of A- and B-level headings. Indicate on the outline any places where you want to use a visual. If you plan to use presentation software, go to “outline mode” or “outline view” to start laying out your presentation.

If your presentation includes multiple visuals, you might create a storyboard rather than an outline. Storyboards help you see how the visuals will complement the spoken content. A simple storyboard (Figure 21.3) for an oral presentation consists of a double-column format in which your discussion is outlined in the left column and the specific supporting visuals are described in the right column.

Figure 21.2 is an outline for a short oral presentation with only a few slides and visuals, whereas Figure 21.3 is a partial storyboard for a longer oral presentation involving many visuals.
Figure 21.2

An outline for a short oral presentation
A figure shows an outline for a short oral presentation.
Figure 21.2 Full Alternative Text
Figure 21.3

A partial storyboard for a long oral presentation
A figure shows a partial storyboard for a long oral presentation.
Figure 21.3 Full Alternative Text
Determine a Delivery Style

Your presentation’s effectiveness will depend largely on how well it connects with listeners. Different styles of delivery (memorized, impromptu, scripted, and extemporaneous) create different connections.

A memorized delivery takes a long time to prepare, offers no chance for revision during the presentation, and spells disaster if you lose your place. Avoid a memorized delivery style in workplace settings.

An impromptu (off-the-cuff) delivery style can be a natural way of connecting with listeners—but only when you really know your material, feel comfortable with your audience, and are in an informal speaking situation. Avoid an impromptu delivery style when making complex and formal presentations, no matter how well you know the material.

In some formal settings (a speech, a keynote address, a conference paper), it may be appropriate for you to read your material verbatim from a prepared script. A scripted delivery can help you keep strict control over your material and meet time limits, but it offers little chance for audience interaction and can be boring. If you do plan to read aloud, rehearse until you are able to glance up from the script periodically without losing your place.

An extemporaneous delivery style is carefully planned, practiced, and based on notes that keep you on track. In this natural way of addressing an audience, you glance at your material and speak in a conversational manner. Extemporaneous delivery is based on key ideas in sentence or topic outline form, often projected as overhead transparencies or as slides generated from presentation software.

An extemporaneous delivery is typically the preferred method for oral presentations in the workplace: It provides somewhat of a script for the speaker and allows the speaker to interact with the audience while following along. However, there are dangers, such as losing track, skipping over a key point, or going over a time limit.

Table 21.1 summarizes the various uses and drawbacks of the latter three delivery styles (memorized style should always be avoided and is therefore not included). In many instances, some combination of methods can be effective. For example, in an orientation for new employees, you might prefer the flexibility of an extemporaneous format but also read a scripted passage aloud from time to time.
Table 21.1

Advantages and drawbacks of delivery styles
Delivery Method 	* Main Uses * 	• Main Drawbacks •
IMPROMPTU (inventing as you speak) 	

* in-house meetings

* small, intimate groups

* simple topics
	

• offers no chance to prepare

• speaker might ramble

• speaker might lose track
SCRIPTED (reading verbatim from a written work) 	

* formal speeches

* large, unfamiliar groups

* strict time limit

* cross-cultural audiences

* highly nervous speaker
	

• takes a long time to prepare

• speaker can’t move around

• limits human contact

• can appear stiff and unnatural

• might bore listeners

• makes working with visuals difficult
EXTEMPORANEOUS (speaking from an outline of key points) 	

* face-to-face presentations

* medium-sized, familiar groups

* moderately complex topics

* somewhat flexible time limit

* visually based presentations
	

• speaker might lose track

• speaker might leave something out

• speaker might exceed time limit

• speaker might fumble with notes, visuals, or equipment
Table 21.1 Full Alternative Text
Choose Your Technology

Although presentation software is a helpful and popular tool (see the section on presentation software in this chapter), there are other options. For example, you might opt for a more natural, extemporaneous presentation in which you use handouts or flip charts. Or you might decide to sketch on a whiteboard or show a short video clip. Think about your audience: What would work best? What would keep people active, engaged, and listening? Can you combine the use of slides with some places where you draw on a whiteboard or invite your audience to add ideas to the slides you’ve created?
Plan the Use of Visuals

Visuals not only add vigor and impact to a presentation, but they also summarize complex information and set a tone. Although visuals are an important component, they can also be overused or misused. A presentation that simply uses one visual after the other could bore or confuse an audience. Likewise, visuals that carry no real meaning or that are hard to see or decipher will frustrate the audience. Seek a balance of text/speech and visuals that enhance the presentation rather than distracting from it. Figure 21.4 uses one visual, a photograph of students using social media, to help break up the text on this slide and create visual interest.
Figure 21.4

Four slides from a short oral presentation
A figure shows four slides from a short oral presentation. This is slide 1.
21.4-2 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows four slides from a short oral presentation. This is slide 2.
21.4-2 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows four slides from a short oral presentation. This is slide 3.
21.4-2 Full Alternative Text
A figure shows four slides from a short oral presentation. This is slide 4.

Note that for the full presentation, each bullet point on Slide 2 would have a corresponding slide as part of the body of the presentation Source: Duggan, M., & Smith, A. (2013). Social media update 2013. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/12/30/social-media-update-2013/.
Figure 21.4 Full Alternative Text
Practice the Presentation

On your own or with a volunteer viewer, practice your presentation. This process will give you an idea of how you sound and look while speaking; it will also reveal gaps or wordiness in your presentation and help you get the timing right. If possible, make an audio or video recording of yourself to see if you speak too fast or too slow or if you gesture too much or look stiff. Try to rehearse with the actual equipment you plan to use and in the actual setting.
Strategies
for Preparing Oral Presentations

    Determine your audience. Fill out the audience portion of an Audience and Purpose Profile Sheet. Know exactly who your listeners are (primary and secondary), what their attitude is toward the topic, what they already know, and what they need to learn. If you anticipate that different audience members will have different needs, make sure you speak to the entire audience.

    Determine your purpose. Is the purpose of the presentation to inform, instruct, or persuade? Adjust your presentation to suit its particular purpose.

    Do your research. Make sure you understand your topic. Anticipate audience questions or objections, and prepare answers or responses.

    Decide on your delivery style. Avoid the memorized style, as you may lose your place. Choose an impromptu, scripted, or extemporaneous style, but recognize the pros and cons of each.

    Organize your presentation. Include an introduction, body, and conclusion. Prepare an outline (typical presentation) or storyboard (visually complex presentation) to work out what information to discuss and when.

    Choose your technology. You need not always use presentation software. Consider alternatives such as handouts, flip charts, or whiteboards.

    Use visuals. Whenever possible, enhance your presentation by using visuals, but only when they genuinely add to the discussion. Be sure all your visuals are easy for the audience to see and understand.

    Rehearse your presentation. Practice, and correct any content or style problems based on your rehearsal.
    
Using Presentation Software

    21.5 Use presentation software effectively.

PowerPoint, a Microsoft product, is still the most widely used presentation software, especially in the workplace (Figure 21.4 was created using PowerPoint). Yet other apps, such as Apple Keynote, Google Slides, and Prezi are also used by students and professionals alike. Each of these programs offer dozens of templates you can choose from, suitable for almost any situation. Templates can be very helpful for organizing your ideas and saving you the time involved in creating a professional design from scratch. But do not start your presentation by choosing a template.

As discussed earlier in this chapter, begin by doing careful research about your audience, the purpose of your presentation, and your topic. Use an outlining or storyboarding technique to organize your ideas. Then, choose a template that is right for your situation, considering the colors, shapes, fonts, and so forth based on guidance provided in Chapter 7 of this book. Also, keep in mind that many organizations provide in-house templates, customized with the appropriate colors, logos, and other features and information. (For instance, your college or university probably has a school template that uses the school colors and official college font.) Templates can usually be modified if you need to change a font or color but want to retain the layout.

Keep your presentation clean, clear, and professional. Remember that what looks great on your laptop (a bright yellow font on a blue background, for example) might be unreadable on a large screen. Experiment a bit with animation and transitions, but be careful: Too much visual “noise” will distract your audience. If you are presenting as a team, transitions are a nice way to signal a shift between speakers.

If your topic involves spatial concepts (design ideas for a new office layout, for example) or visuals that are best displayed in an interactive manner, you might try Prezi, which offers many built-in features for motion and animation. Use animation, sound, and video clips only as needed to support your presentation.

For collaborative projects, consider using a cloud-based, collaborative app. Google Slides, for instance, available through Google Drive, allows multiple people to work on the project in real time, with a small chat window that you and your team can use to discuss ideas while working. The file is updated as you work on it, and the document remains on the server, not on someone’s hard drive (or worse yet, attached but lost in a string of someone’s emails). Microsoft Cloud, Dropbox, and your organization’s internal file server also provide ways to collaborate and store files.

Whatever approach you choose, remember that good presentations must be well researched, carefully planned, well organized, and correctly timed. Excessive material crammed on one slide might help you as you speak but will frustrate your audience. Also, while presentation software helps structure your story or argument, an overreliance on bulleted items can oversimplify complex issues and distract from the deeper message. For more specific advice, see the Strategies for Using Presentation Software on pages 381–382.

Video Conferencing

    21.6 Understand the workplace uses of video conferencing.

When audience members are at different job sites (around the country or in different countries), a face-to-face presentation may not be possible. Video conferencing allows team members to join the meeting but not be physically present. There are many kinds of video conferencing, including the following:

    Webinars allow you to deliver a presentation via the Internet. Audience members are invited to connect to the webinar via their computer and software such as WebEx, GoToMeeting, or Adobe Connect. Most webinars display the presenter’s slides on the screen while the presenter talks through each slide and controls when to change slides. You can also display video of the speaker and/or other conference participants. Audience questions are typically handled via video chat or a typed live chat feature.

    Skype allows people to connect via real-time audio and video from a computer, phone, or tablet. Skype software needs to be downloaded in advance, and each person needs to set up a user name and password. Skype has become quite popular, in part because it is free (and easy to use). But the sound and image quality may not always be adequate for complex technical and business presentations. Most companies prefer a webinar or other secure in-house video conferencing approach.

For video conferencing to work, everyone must be available at the same time. If you are on the east coast of the United States, for example, and some of your audience is in Europe, there could be anywhere from a five- to eight-hour time difference. Video conferencing with audiences in Asia requires even more careful time calculations. Depending on the location of team members, it may be impossible to get everyone to connect at the same time. In these cases, you may be able to record a session and allow people to view it, and your slides, later.
Strategies
for Using Presentation Software and Video Conferencing

    Don’t let the app do the thinking. Use your own research, sense of audience and purpose, and other original ideas to shape the presentation. Then use the software to help make the material accessible and interesting. If you start with the slides, your ideas will be constrained by the template and its use of bullets and headings. Create an outline or storyboard first, then find a template that fits your thinking.

    Have a backup plan in case the technology fails. For smaller settings, bring handouts to the presentation. Save copies of your presentation on a flash drive and on a cloud file server (e.g. Dropbox; Google drive; Microsoft cloud; other). If allowable, email or upload your slides to the meeting organizer (or your instructor) before the presentation. If your presentation requires a connection to the Internet, check on that aspect in advance to be sure you can get on the room’s wifi (in hotels or conference centers, for example, you may need a special password to connect).

    Don’t distribute handouts until you are ready to discuss the contents. Otherwise, people will start reading the handouts instead of paying attention to you.

    Start with an overview slide. Orient your audience by showing an opening slide that indicates what you plan to cover and in what order.

    Find a balance between text and visuals. Excessive text is boring; excessive visuals can be confusing. Each visual should serve a purpose: to summarize information, to add emphasis, to set a tone, and so on. Avoid overcrowding the slides: Aim for no more than seven to nine lines per slide (including the heading) with no more than six to nine words per bulleted item.

    Avoid using too many slides. In general, aim for one slide per key point. If you are the kind of person who likes to embellish and enjoys speaking to a crowd, use fewer slides.

    Don’t simply read the slides. Don’t just read your slides: People in the audience can do that. Be interactive with your audience; use the slides as a guide.

    Avoid too much flash. Don’t allow the medium (animations, color, sound) to obscure your message.

    Keep viewers oriented. Don’t show a slide until you are ready to discuss it. Present one topic per slide, bringing bullets (subtopics) on one at a time as you discuss them. Let your audience digest the slide data while you speak—not before or after.

    End with a “conclusions” or “questions” slide. Give your audience a sense of having come full circle. On a “conclusions” slide, summarize the key points. A “questions” slide can simply provide a heading and a visual. Allow time at the end of your presentation for questions and/or comments.

    Use video conferencing when necessary. If people can’t be in the same place at the same time, use a video conferencing solution (WebEx or another webinar platform) to allow all team members to participate in the presentation.

    For video conferencing, keep international audience members in mind. Remember that 9:00 a.m. your time may not work for people who live on the other side of the globe. For these people, you might need to use the “record” feature, to make your presentation and slides available to them.
    
    
Delivering Oral Presentations

    21.7 Deliver a confident, professional oral presentation.

Many find that the actual delivery of an oral presentation is the most difficult hurdle. Most people experience anxiety when they must speak in public. If you are particularly nervous, seek additional advice about ways to calm your nerves, such as stretching beforehand and performing deep breathing exercises. You are likely to find that once you have actually spoken your first line, you will settle down quickly. The following Strategies offer further advice.
Strategies
for Delivering Oral Presentations

    Be rehearsed and prepared. The best way to calm your nerves is to remind yourself of the preparation and research you have done. Practice your delivery so that it is professional and appropriate but natural for you. Also, know your material inside and out.

    Memorize a brief introduction. If you begin your presentation smoothly and confidently, you won’t be as nervous going forward. Do not open by saying “I’m a little bit nervous today” or “I have a slight cold. Can everyone hear me in the back?” Just begin. A memorized introduction will help you avoid having to ad lib (potentially badly) when you are most anxious.

    Dress for success. Wear clothes that suggest professionalism and confidence.

    Stand tall and use eye contact. Good posture and frequent eye contact convey a sense of poise, balance, and confidence. Practice in front of a mirror. If looking people directly in the eye makes you nervous, aim just above people’s heads. Or find a friendly face or two and look at those people first. As you gain confidence, be sure to cast your gaze around the entire room or conference table.

    Take charge. If you get interrupted but don’t want to take questions until the end, remember that you are in control. Be polite but firm: “Thank you for that good question. I’ll save it and other questions until the end of my presentation.”

    Gesture naturally. Don’t force yourself to move around or be theatrical if this is not your style. But do not stand like a robot, either. Unless you are speaking from a podium or lectern, move around just a bit. And when it’s time to take questions, consider moving closer to the audience. In a conference room setting, if everyone else is seated, you should stand.

    Allow time for questions, comments, and discussion. Announce a time limit; listen carefully; ask for clarification if necessary; provide brief but well-considered replies (if time allows—otherwise, continue later and in private). When the time is up, announce that you have time for one more question or comment, and conclude politely.

Checklist
for Oral Presentations

    Have I analyzed my audience and purpose thoroughly?

    Have I done adequate research about the topic, looking into all sides of the problem or issue?

    Have I organized my material, using an outline or storyboard?

    Have I chosen a delivery style that best suits my skills and the needs of my audience?

    Have I decided to use presentation software (e.g., PowerPoint) or to use more basic technology or no ­technology at all?

    Am I using an appropriate number of visuals, and do the visuals serve a specific purpose?

    Have I rehearsed my presentation and ironed out problems with content and delivery?

    If using presentation software, have I followed the strategies given in this chapter?

    Have I calmed my nerves and gained confidence by following the strategies for delivering presentations in this chapter?

    Am I prepared to allow time for questions and comments and to interact with my audience effectively when doing so?

Applications
General Applications

    Prepare an oral presentation based on the formal report or proposal you wrote for this class. Develop an outline and a storyboard that includes at least three visuals. Ask your instructor for the time limit of the presentation (15 minutes? 20 minutes?), and practice so that you do not exceed the allotted time. (Hint: Consider the ratio of one slide per minute, then cut back to 1–2 slides if you are a slow talker.) Make note of places where you tend to struggle or places where you speak for too long.

    At work, on an internship, or at a campus event, observe a presentation, and evaluate it according to the Strategies boxes in this chapter. In a memo to your instructor (without naming the speaker), identify strong and weak areas and suggest improvements. Note any technologies used and how much, if any, interaction the speaker had with the audience.

Team Application

In the workplace, presentations are often prepared and delivered by more teams of people. In groups of three to four students, come up with a presentation topic that everyone can work on. (You might want to base this topic on a group writing activity from the semester.) Discuss how, as a team, you will approach the research, planning, and creation of the presentation. For example, will one person be responsible for the research? Will another person put the slides together? Can you use a collaborative or cloud-based app, such as Google Slides, to work on the project? Create a brief presentation, using slides plus any other materials you deem important, describing the process you will take and the decisions your team made. Give the presentation to class. Make sure every student has a role in the presentation.
Global Application

You’ve been assigned to represent your company at an international conference or before international clients. As you plan and prepare your presentation, what can you do to remain sensitive to various cultural expectations? For example, some cultures might be offended by a presentation that gets right to the point without first observing formalities of politeness. Use the Internet to research issues about intercultural communication, then create a short presentation on this topic for the class.
Social and Digital Media Application

As noted in the Team Application above, presentations are often created collaboratively. What is the best way to share a presentation file and work on it as a group? Compare your options using PowerPoint, Prezi, Google drive, Microsoft cloud, and other tools or sites. Pay attention to the file sharing and collaboration features, and look at the various templates, transitions, ways of importing visual, and other features. Create a short presentation for the class recommending what would work best for students in this class.
